This week in virology, the podcast about viruses, the kind that make you sick.
From Microbe TV, this is Twiv. This week in virology, Episode 689 recorded on December 3, 2020.
I'm Vincent Racken Yello, and you're listening to the podcast all about viruses. Joining me
today from New York, Daniel Griffin. Hello, everyone. Vincent, do I say hello everyone or
hello everybody? I think I alternate, right? I don't think it matters whatever you feel like
on a given night. Yeah. All right, so let me start. I was emailing with my buddy, Peter Hotez,
earlier today. And he was on the recent, what was it, stick to the Vax? I think that was a
pun on stick to the Vax maybe. Peter Hotez, I'm going to, I'm going to put a disclaimer right up
front. So, you know, this is similar to what you might hear when you get on an airplane. And they
say, you know, this flight is headed to San Francisco. So if that is not your final destination,
you might want to get off now. Right. And, you know, it may seem a while ago, but you know,
when we started these, it was actually, I had come to Vincent, our listeners may not know this
backstory. But we were trying to keep all the, all the physicians here in the New York Tri-State
area updated on, you know, what we were learning, what was happening. And Vincent very generously
sort of offered this forum as a chance for us to sort of once a week share that knowledge.
So these updates started back in March. And it was all about, you know, what we were learning
about COVID, the therapeutics, what we were seeing firsthand as practicing clinicians.
So, you know, it's really what we're here to share is the truth of what we're seeing. There's
no real agenda here. We're not trying to grow any audience. At some point, maybe Vincent will
kick me off if, you know, no one wants to listen to me anymore. But this has been, I think,
a tremendous service. So I want to thank Vincent for that. But I will say this is, there's no warm
soup here. I'm not here to make these difficult times easier. I'm just here to basically share
what's going on, what we're learning, the cold, hard truth. Oddly enough, I think some anti-vaxxers,
I've been told the word trolls is applicable here at times. But, you know, for the next 30
minutes, we're not going to talk about anti-vaxx theories. So if you tuned in accidentally to the
wrong podcast, this might be time to jump off the next 30 minutes, you're never going to get them
back. So, you know, spend them well. Okay. Now that I have made my disclaimer, my quotation,
one ought never to turn one's back on a threatened danger, but to try to run away from it. If you
do that, you will double the danger. But if you meet it promptly and without flinching, you will
reduce the danger by half. And can people guess who that's, that's Winston again. I like Winston
Churchill. Now, these are, these are dark times already. People keep saying, oh, we've got a dark
winter ahead of us. But you know, there are over 100,000 Americans in the hospital right now with
COVID-19. And, you know, yesterday, the numbers were almost 3000 today, we have over 3000 people
who died here in the US of COVID-19. We've reached capacity at the hospitals here in New York.
You know, I got a alert from one of the hospitals yesterday, you know, we have, you know,
numbers of people stuck here in the ER because there's no open beds. The ICUs are overflowing
into the other areas. This is not a great sign. I mean, we are not even seeing the post Thanksgiving
search. So just want people to sort of think about when they're making their decisions. We are as
bad right now as it has ever gotten. More people died today than have ever died in a single day
from COVID-19 here in the States. More people are in the hospital right now with COVID-19 than ever.
So really think about that. All right, let's move through our phases, our pre-exposure period.
A little update here for our clinicians. I got a lot of questions about this. New York has now
recommended broader use of eye protection. And I know we've talked a little bit about the science
behind this. You know, it takes a little while for the recommendations to catch up with the
science, but New York State Department of Health now strongly recommends universal use of eye
protection by healthcare personnel for all patient interactions. And this is in addition to the
face masks. And I got an email sort of asking about this and it was entertaining. So it was a whole
loop. You know, it was a number of clinicians in a clinic and one of them emailed me saying,
you know, we only do well visits. We don't let people come in if they're sick and not sure if
this really applies to me. And so I responded back and said, you think they're well visits.
But you know, what percent of those people are pre-symptomatic or asymptomatic? And that's
really the thing. If you get a call the next day and they say, you know what, I wasn't feeling 100%
when I saw you. And today I just got a test. And you were not wearing your eye protection.
That's a potential exposure. So, you know, this is really moving into a universal precautions
approach, at least for the foreseeable future here. You know, for front facing healthcare workers,
we'll talk about why there is a finite period of time that we're going to need to be practicing
this really high level of caution. But universal recommendation here in New York when clinicians
are interacting. And I extend this to all staff. When you're within that six feet, when you're
going to potentially be at risk, protect your mouth, protect your nose and protect your eyes.
People are still taking zinc, vitamin D, vitamin C. This all seems fine. And there was a nice
article in nature, analysis of vitamin D levels among asymptomatic and critically ill COVID-19
patients. And it's correlation with inflammatory markers. But you know, I'm going to sort of push
out here again, say we really need to do some randomized control trials. I mean, we currently
in the US spend over a billion dollars a year, over a billion dollars a year on vitamin D supplements
and testing. That's a lot of money. It would be nice to know, like, you know, is that being,
is that well spent money? So, you know, if it's not, then you could give a little bit of that,
you know, Vincent in the lab. So, you know, or support micro TV. But no, it's, it's important.
You know, we do a lot of, we do a lot of studies looking at, you know, small molecule inhibitors,
pharmaceutical agents. Vitamin D is something a lot of people take for a lot of different
reasons. It would make sense to really understand its role in COVID-19. I also want to talk about
testing here, right? This is hopefully the pre-exposure period. Hopefully you haven't been
exposed yet. And we really ramped up testing over the last couple weeks here. I was doing in
one of those, I call them the microphone bokeh interviews this morning. You know,
you've got a whole bunch of microphones and, you know, you're not sure who you're talking to,
but you look at the, the sea of cameras. And we were talking about what we've done with
rapid testing in the last few weeks. You know, and I was there with Bonnie Simmons. She's the
head of our Tri-State Urgent Cares. She's my buddy, Adam Fitterstein's boss. And she just, you know,
she always wonders, again, you know, ever I call you pick up the phone, I'm like,
Bonnie, you're kind of a hero of mine. You know, you really allowed us to make this happen,
all this rapid testing. And what we saw right before Thanksgiving is a lot of people were going
and getting tested. A lot of people with asymptomatic and presymptomatic infections were being picked
up, diagnosed, sort of pulled out, contact tracing, and then those people were being picked out. And
I really think, you know, we were, we were saving lives here. We were detecting people
before they went to those gatherings. We were picking up who else was infected that they were
interacting with. And so this is really, really taken on and people are realizing the utility.
You know, two days before symptoms, five days of symptoms, the rapid test gives you a result in
about 15 minutes has really been tremendous. This is free, right? This is something that we,
you know, as a society are picking up. This is not something we charged people for.
And I was there this morning. It was quite cold. And there were two lines of cars, you know,
and just sort of going around the quarter. And these were all people that were basically driving
up, getting swab, they would then drive on. And by the time they got to work, school, home,
they would be alerted by the results and basically told like, you know, if you just got to work,
stay in your car, turn around, go home. Or otherwise, all right, you're clear and can move forward. So
so much more helpful than, you know, finding out in four or five days after you've exposed
people that oh, by the way, when you went to that Thanksgiving dinner, when you went to work, when
you went to school, you were shedding fire really embracing this. And a lot of people are moving
in this direction. Now vaccines. All right. I'll call this better than vitamin D, right? If you
have a choice, a good vaccine or vitamin D, I'm going with the vaccine. I might also, at some
point remember to take some of that vitamin D that's still sitting on the shelf in my medicine
cabinet, only growing in value, I'm sure. So we got more information. And it's always amazing as I
was like, how is this really only the last week? It always seems like old news, but we got more
information on the Moderna vaccine. And Moderna has now applied for EUA for their vaccine. And some
of this was covered in the previous 12. So listen for more in depth there. But what do we as clinicians
are going to bullet point this? Moderna reported a vaccine efficacy of about 94.1%. And if you
looked at the secondary endpoint, severe disease, 100%, no one who received the Moderna vaccine ended
up requiring an ER visit or hospital care. It also was reported that the vaccine was well tolerated.
There were no serious safety concerns. And I'll sort of make the point here, the difference
between reactogenicity and severe adverse effects. You get the vaccine, feel a little under the
weather for a day or two. Shane Crotty has been tweeting out. I've been retweeting this. It's
the rock, Dwayne Reed, the rock. And he goes to the gym. And he's really sore the next day. That's
kind of what it's like. That's the reactogenicity. That's your immune system learning. And then
you move forward, but no serious safety concerns. And now we have about 70,000 people that have
been vaccinated. We've got months of this. So we've exceeded two months of median follow-up
post vaccination as required by the US FDA for the EUA. So we'll be seeing that reviewed on the 17th.
That's the other bullet point. Thursday, December 17th, the Moderna vaccine is scheduled to be
reviewed. What do we know so far? This primary analysis that we got is an update 196 cases,
of which 185 cases of COVID-19 were observed in the placebo group. Only 11 cases in the vaccinated
group. And then as mentioned, all the severe cases were in people that had not gotten vaccinated.
Someone died. And that was another person who did not get vaccinated. So pretty impressive. So
between Pfizer and Moderna projections are that we should have enough vaccine for approximately 40
million doses by the end of this month. We expect to start vaccinating people this month.
70 million doses per month starting in January of projection as we will have the ability to
vaccinate 100 million Americans by the end of February. Pfizer Ultra cold vaccine did just get
approval in the UK. So people probably have heard about that. So I'm just going to hit a couple
important dates for our clinicians to keep an eye on. One already passed December 1st, the ACIP.
This is the advisory committee on vaccines. And this was a little bit different, right?
Normally this committee meets after a vaccine is licensed, and then they give advice on who should
get it. So this is a little bit of a twist. They met and they said, so when a vaccine gets
an EUA, we're going to give some preemptive recommendations on who should be prioritized.
And my wife really liked this because initially they had, we're going to have phase one and two
and sort of down the line. So what they did is they created phase one A, B, and C. This is
the way a whole bunch of people are in phase one. So I thought that was clever. And what they did
basically is nothing that surprised anyone. They said, hey, we're going to do healthcare workers
right up front. And then we're going to sort of move down the line. We'll be moving into educators
and firefighters and police officers and people in food and sort of really like critical people.
And then we're going to move into phase one C. And that's the 65 and over. So I'm going to talk
a little bit about one. I think people will actually see the vaccine. So December 10th,
that's a week from the time we're recording this. The FDA will review the Pfizer vaccine.
December 17th, the FDA will review the Moderna vaccine. And just to talk a little bit about the
numbers, front facing healthcare workers, this is phase one a healthcare personnel. And this
includes like, you know, EMTs, EMS, and also that it's going to move right into the long term care
facility residents. You too, right? This is all. What's that? Are you included in that?
In the long term care facility resident or the health care health care?
I am actually. Yeah. I'm actually, you know, I think I was talking with people I work with and
may have I think I may have seen more COVID patients or had more exposure to COVID patients
than anyone else I know. So yeah, I have a lot of exposure. You know, I go see people in the ER,
see people in the ICU, I see people, you know, out in the urgent care settings as well in the
clinics. So yeah, if you can get exposed to COVID, I make it my business. So Daniel,
are you going to feel somewhat relieved that you have a vaccine?
Tremendously, tremendously relieved, actually. You know, and this I'm going to answer that
question. I keep skirting, right? People keep saying, Dan, you know, are you going to get the
vaccine and when, you know, and I heard Barack Obama, he's like, can I get the vaccine as soon as it's
ready? You know, and I think that's the thing. A week from today, when we're recording this on
Thursday, so a week from today, the FDA is going to have the review of the Pfizer vaccine. All the
information is going to be out. One of the people on our vaccine committee is going to be tasked
with, you know, listening to all the questions, reviewing all the data. So hopefully when we
record next time, I'll have all the information to go ahead and say, yes, I feel like this is safe
where ready to go. Or if something comes up, I'll let people know otherwise. But yeah, I anticipate
a little more than a week after this drops. I'll be getting in line for my vaccine and planning on
I'll stream that live on YouTube or something. Get someone to tape it on your iPhone, record it
on your iPhone, we can splice it in here. Okay, yeah, because I think I think that that will help
people. You know, you want to see someone, you know, I was talking to my mom earlier today,
I answered it no one other than the truth. And she's like, yes, well aware of that.
So yeah, I'm going to get the vaccine if I feel like it's safe and effective. And I think that
that will sort of help get the message out there. But I don't think it's safe and effective. I'm
going to I'm going to wait until I feel confident. So hopefully that'll help our listeners. So yeah,
phase one A is going to start in December, we are all ramped up and ready to go. Then we move into
phase one B and that's all the essential workers I mentioned. So education, food and agriculture,
police, firefighters, correctional officers, transportation, that's going to start in January.
And then phase one C, that's 65 and over. That's sort of our high risk. That's going to be January
moving into February. So this is really happening pretty quick. So this is good stuff. Once we once
we move into March, that's when we're really moving into wider distribution. And children,
people wonder about children has been tested on children yet. But Pfizer has announced that
they're going to be starting to test in the 12 to 18 year old population. They're going to have
3000 people in that initial venture, I should say, Moderna has also said they're going to be moving
their vaccine into that population as well. So we're going to have important information on can
we use this vaccine in younger individuals. 18 is kind of arbitrary, right? I'm not sure how
immunology and the right to vote somehow peg that 18. And I was worried when they raised a drinking
age to 21 that that would somehow but now I mean, I'm really arbitrary there. So I did want to talk
a little bit actually about this whole ultra cold thing with Pfizer, right? And we always talk about
vaccine hesitancy. And we're talking about the patients being hesitant. But unfortunately, I think
because of some issues with communication here, we've had vaccine hesitancy on the part of
clinics, physicians, healthcare organizations saying, you know, I just don't want to have to
deal with Pfizer and this ultra cold. And I don't want to buy these deep freezers.
Or the other side is you have all these people spending really a lot of money
buying these, you know, these freezers. So I'll talk a little bit about this. So I'm on this
National Vaccine Initiative Committee. And actually, Wednesday, so yesterday, I was in a meeting
with basically our whole group and Pfizer's medical director. This is, I believe, Catherine
Jansen is her name, really bright woman. After the after the conversation, I talked to John
hit who's like our senior person. And he was actually saying, you know, I guess when you have a lot
of money, you can hire really good people. So I was impressed by that. But they've really
figured this stuff out. It's pretty amazing. They've got these thermal shippers, which really are
a little bit larger than we'll say like five personal pizza boxes. So it's really five personal
pizza boxes. Each personal pizza box has about 200 miles, actually, 195 miles, five doses per
mile. And they're in this box surrounded by dry ice. We'll talk a little about dry ice.
And basically send this out. So five, you know, you could say 195 times five. So about 1000 doses
in this thermal shipper. And that thermal shipper itself is basically a deep freezer. You know,
you repack it with dry ice every few days, everything is in there. You don't have to buy one of these
deep freezers. It's small enough that it fits under a desk. They even spend, they even send you these
special thermal gloves. I asked about that on the call. I'm like, how am I going to touch those,
you know, negative 70 degree things? Because I remember, you know, going into the deep freeze,
you know, and you pull it out and you get freezer burn on your fingers. So they send goggles,
they send special gloves, you grab as many vials as you want, let them come up to room temperature,
add some saline, inverted a few times, and then fill your syringes. So it's really,
really user friendly, really something that can get out there. And it's actually something not
only that I think we're going to do here in the US, but there's already plans to use the same
technology throughout Sub-Saharan Africa, you know, low middle income countries as well. So
really no issues here. Everyone should start getting signed up, registered so they can make
this happen. You get your first dose with Pfizer, three weeks later, you get your second dose,
and within five days, you are at these wonderful levels of protection that we've all heard about.
Just want to sort of let people know that this whole cold storage, ultra cold stuff,
it's really not an issue. Pfizer's worked this out. And so there'll be a little details adjusted
at sort of the endpoint once the FDA comes and says, this is exactly the way we want you to do
it. How many times can you recharge that thermal freezer with your, you know, with your, what kind
of ice is that? Dry ice. And I promised I would mention dry ice. And I'm going to make a video
this weekend on homemade drugs, because everyone's like, Oh my gosh, we're going to run out of dry
ice. And it's really easy to make. And you know, don't try this at home. People will listen and do
that when I say that. But you know, you can really just take one of those CO2 fire extinguishers
and a cloth bag and either tape it or have a really good glove and you blast into the bag and
presto, you have dry ice. So I'll be, I'll be blasting that on Twitter this weekend. But
yeah, we're not going to run out of dry ice. It's easy to make dry ice. We've got lots of CO2.
We're good to go. Apparently, there was a CO2 shortage in England a couple of years back. You
know, they couldn't make beer or something. So nothing to worry about. All right, let's move
into our incubation post exposure period. That little changes here, right? The CDC updated its
guidance. And they basically said, this makes sense. I've been talking about this for a little
while, but now it's official. You know, when we used to say you got exposed, now you got to
quarantine for 14 days, my wife, her famous, that's excessive. So yeah, she's right. Nobody did that.
So now what they've said is what you can do is at the end of seven days, get a test.
If the test is negative, then you can move forward. So that was just updated December 2nd.
And this does not need to be a PCR. They don't specify that you can go ahead and get your rapid
test 15 minutes later, you find out you're good to go, you move forward. So I say that's, that's
really positive. All right, now we move into the viral symptom phase. Now, unfortunately,
you have you have not missed the bullet. You've actually got infected. You're starting to have
symptoms, just some monoclonal antibody updates. You know, people, people have not really forgotten
about the monoclonal antibodies. There still tends to be a tremendous demand. And actually,
when this when this episode drops on Saturday, there'll be some stuff in the news about Eli
Lilly and my involvement with them. So tell people to watch the news and we'll talk more about this
next week. But I did want to add a little bit of a discussion. I was listening to TWIV 688.
And there was a whole discussion about subcutaneous versus intradermal and the half life of the
antibodies. You know, it reminded me of of rabies when the when the woman who wrote in was talking
about injecting herself in the belly and all these different things. So just a couple of things to
talk about. So intradermal, if anyone ever had their their skin test for tuberculosis,
that's where you put the needle just a little under the skin and you raise a little blab,
that's intradermal. That's in the skin. Subcutaneous is sort of down in the fat layer,
but above the muscle. So you're not getting into the muscle, you're, you know, you pull a nice chunk
of fat. It's easy to do on me, particularly because I don't go to the gym anymore. But, you know,
one day it'll be harder, hopefully. You know, the rest of my life is so hard. Why is my belly so soft?
But you grab a nice chunk and you put the injection in there. The reason we're studying monoclonal
antibodies in the subcutaneous is you don't have to go to a clinic. You don't have to go to a hospital.
Anyone can grab a nice chunk and inject in the way they do with Proleia, for instance, some of our
other medicines. So we're studying that as well. Why do you do four different sites? It's a question
of volume at this point. It's just sort of a large volume. What about half-life? The half-life
is different with the different antibody preparations. So the Eli Lilly, the BAM BAM, the BAM Linibin
map, half-life is about 21 days. They get a really high dose. 21 days, it's about half of that.
The half-life is a little bit longer with the Regeneron antibodies. And I think I mentioned
GSK has made a stock modification, so there anybody has an even longer half-life. So
next thing I guess I'll mention is that this is passive immunity. So when you give someone this
infusion or you do the subcutaneous injection, then you're not going to see an immune response.
You're not going to see lymph nodes. You're not going to see soreness at the site.
About 2% of the time people get a little bit itchy. So that's why we sort of observed them.
Get a little bit itchy. We give them Benadryl has been an issue to date. So
making some progress there. The early inflammatory phase. People should go back and listen to
immune 39, a Tonka truck full of salt. And they have a discussion right at about 57 minutes about
the cytokine storm. And the whole early inflammatory response is really a sophisticated, complicated
thing. And it reminded me of a book and a movie based on the same book, Smilla Sense of Snow,
written by the Danish author Peter Hogue. And the main character is a Greenlander.
And she presents this idea that a lot of people have heard where the Inuit have multiple words
for snow. I think in this book, it's 23. The myth is that there are 50. And I think it's sort of
an interesting discussion when we're talking about this early inflammatory phase and we talk
about cytokine storms. Really, there's a lot of complexity here. And I think that you get the
immunologist response. It's very complicated. But from a therapeutic point of view,
we're still limited in what we do here. We still use steroids during this period. We still do
oxygen. We still do medications to prevent people against cloth. So a lot of supportive care.
Secondary infection phase. We're actually, I think I mentioned last time, but we're starting to see
more issues here with resistant organisms because of sort of overuse of antibiotics early on. So
let's really be careful sort of a reminder there to all our clinicians. If you see these people in
the urgent care, you see people in the outpatient setting, what do you do? You might get them hooked
up with a pulse oximeter. You might monitor them. You want to make that decision. Do they need to
come in the hospital? You might consider aspirin, things like that. But no antibiotics is a viral
illness. You want to be really careful. If you're giving more than 10% of your COVID patients
antibiotics, you're overdoing it. Most patients can be managed at home without antibiotics
with really not hospitalization in most cases. But if they do need to be in the hospital, if they
get to this late phase, this is when we start seeing those infections. The multi-system
inflammatory phase, it was like a deja vu back to April today. I don't know if that works right,
but anyway, early on in April, we talked a bit about the Irish patients. I don't know if our
listeners who are with us still remember that. Our Irish patient had an episode at one point
where things seem to be going along really well. I'm thinking this is great. We come in and he's
completely paralyzed. If our listeners remember that. Same thing happened over the last two days
with one of my patients in the ICU. They're getting to the end of week four. We're starting to talk
about discharge planning, getting this person set up with rehab, and completely paralyzed.
And again, this is this Guillain-Barre syndrome that we see as part of this multi-system inflammatory
phase. So that individual has been started on IVIG. It's a 5D treatment that we use.
And the motor comes right back. So sort of a frightening thing. But I think now that we
understand it, this sort of shows the difference in managing patients. Back we first saw this in
April, we did not know what was going on. What's happening, this person was doing so well, suddenly
they're paralyzed. And they're on a ventilator because they can't breathe on their own. But now
we understand where this fits in. The tail phase, I'm going to finish off here because we've got a
few emails. And my goal is to keep this all under 30 minutes. And I'm going to suggest that we
create some kind of survey to decide what to call this tail phase. Now it's been recognized. Is it
long COVID? Is it long haul trucker COVID? Is it long term COVID? Is it long lasting COVID?
Is it post COVID? And actually, I'll let our listeners know that we're recording this on
Thursday. But there is a large semi multi hour conference going on today Thursday and Friday,
where a lot of clinicians, a lot of researchers are all having an NIH sponsored discussion,
trying to better understand not only what's going on here, but how to put together research
projects to try to get a better understanding of how to take care of some of these folks.
So I'll stop there before we hit emails and just remind everyone that we have we have finished our
microbe TV fundraiser, which went very well. I'm happy to say we're going to be able to
generously support microbe TV, which is great. But we're we're now supporting the peace course,
HIV and AIDS programs. Just remember that the other virus is still responsible for a lot of
suffering and death throughout the world. So encourage people to go to parasites without borders.com.
So we can do our matching support for the months of December and January.
All right. So last time we made a new email address for Daniel Daniel at microbe.tv so you can send
the emails there. And I, I save him the trouble of getting them. Actually, they come to me,
but they're still for Daniel and we have a bunch. So let's do a couple.
All right, I'm going to lump the first two together. Both Joy and Dennis are worried about
long term COVID. They wanted, you know, they say they both have it. And what can be done? Are there
any therapeutics in sight? And I've gotten this question many times, Daniel. So what can you tell
us? Yeah, I mean, that was I think really encouraging about what what is going on today. What's going
on tomorrow is that it is recognized that this is a phenomenon. It is recognized that these people
are suffering and that we need to really bring science to bear. This can't be just, oh, try some
mana histamine, see if the melatonin helps you sleep. We need to really get these people together.
So a couple of things I will say is at United in research, I've mentioned that website before,
we are going to basically create a COVID positive community. And we are going to basically give
people a way to go on the web to register a citizen scientist and to basically participate in the
different trials and the different approaches to how do we understand what's going on with people
who continue to suffer from COVID. And we're going to be following serologies. There'll be
questionnaires. There'll be all kinds of biomarker analysis. So it's going to be a lot of individuals
looking at this. I will say at this point, we still have sort of primitive where we focus on
symptoms, but this is going to be moving hopefully to better therapeutics. But there are thousands
and hundreds of thousands of individuals suffering with this post COVID syndrome.
And we're committed to finding answers. All right. Next one is from Chaim who lives in
Washington, D.C. And he says, my kid's school is doing almost everything right, distancing,
mask wearing, you know, no moving around, no testing, unfortunate. He says there's no testing
as in addition to practical issues, they seem to be worried about moral hazard. Anyway, new cases
are spiking here in D.C. We are now cresting the record set at the peak in May. Mayor has tightened
some restrictions, but indoor dining still permitted. So I think things are going to get worse. His
question, is there a point at which we should be pulling our son out of school? Obviously, I don't
expect an exact threshold, but conceptually, does it make sense that at some point the background
might get high enough to overwhelm the in school precautions? Or are the safety measures enough
that we don't have to worry about community spread outside the school? Yeah, you know, I've always
get questions about the schools. And I think that this is important. I'm going to be doing another
talk for one of the schools this Sunday. And I think Shane Crotty is going to be like going
before me, actually, so my buddy Shane Crotty. The science is mounting. The evidence is that you
can make schools a safe place. That doesn't mean everyone's making it a safe place, but you can do
it. So as you describe, if they put all these proper mitigation measures in place, if they,
you know, keep the kids separated, if they wear masks, and watch that they're not indoor dining
at school. And I really commend my son, who's always horrified that, you know, they sit too close
when people eat. And that is true, Barnaby, you should be horrified like I am. We can make schools
safe. The interesting thing is not only have I been weighing in and giving advice and sort of
commenting on schools in the New York area, but actually throughout the country, my first involvement
in schools was actually in March in Texas. And I still remember the conversation. So this was the
superintendent of one of the largest school districts in Texas. And, you know, he asked me,
and I've known him for a while. So he said, you know, Dan, you know, what do you think? Should we
close the schools? And I said, you know what, you can either close them now, or you can wait until
it's too late. And that was back. We didn't understand back in March, we didn't know that we could
make schools a safe place. So this is a different scenario. And I don't think it's like, Oh, just
in New York, you have resources can make the schools safe. I've talked to schools throughout
the country, we can make schools safe in Idaho, in Texas, in Montana, in California, in Colorado.
And and that's that's one of the things. So so I'll go ahead and say, I'm not sure closing schools
makes a lot of sense, even here in New York City, where real estate and space is actually quite tough.
The New York City mayor wants to open the schools again, and wants to do it in a way that they
think is safe, because there are clear harms to closing the schools. And the teachers, you know,
I'm thinking about teachers here too, they can be made safe. If if we do what we know works,
if we don't give the masks, if we don't put measures in place, if we don't have the distancing,
that's a problem. The other thing that is right around the corner, right, the rainbow at the end
of this dark tunnel is right after we do the healthcare workers, we're going to start vaccinating
the teachers. So in the in the coming months, the teachers are going to be safe as well. And I
think that's really going to help us with opening schools. All right, one more from Paul, who is in
Manchester UK. He sends a link to a BBC article about lung damage and wants to hear Dr. Griffin's
thoughts. This is an article about a new scanning mechanism that has identified lung damage months
after the initial infection. I think about this. Yeah, you know, I actually appreciate that you
bring this up, Paul. You know, if anything, I think people underestimate the damage, the morbidity
of COVID-19, you know, some less than wise people have sort of said, Oh, COVID either, you know,
you get it and either live or you die. Yeah, no, most people who get COVID don't just live or die.
A lot of the people that don't die are really negatively impacted. And we see the people with
the long haul, the tale of COVID. But there's also a lot of individuals who were physically
active and they find themselves compromised. We've had several several serious athletes who find
that, you know, they went from running six, seven miles a day to having trouble going up the flight
of stairs. We're appreciating that there can be for a lot of individuals much more lung damage
than was initially appreciated. We're also recognizing heart damage as well. So I think these studies
are really important to let people know that you really want to not get COVID. Because yeah,
you may survive, you may come out the other side, you may be able to tell everyone how great you're
doing. But let's see you try to run a mile after you've had COVID. It may not go so well. So
let's really for the next few months until, and I guess this reminds me of my other movie as we'll
sort of finish here soon. This was, I watched Greyhound. It always takes about a week because I
watch in like seven minute increments. But this is a World War II and it's a shipping convoy and
they've they've left the safety of air cover of the US. And now they're heading towards air cover
over in England. You know, and they're how many hours till we're back in air cover. And that's
where we are right now. It's only weeks and months till we've got the air cover of the vaccine. So,
you know, let's just be safe. Let's zigzag. Let's let's avoid those crowds. Let's wear those masks.
Let's wash our hands so we can get back to the air cover of the vaccine and the pre COVID world.
All right. That's our COVID-19 clinical update number 39 from Dr. Daniel Griffin. Thank you, Daniel.
Oh, pleasure. It's always and everyone be safe.
