This week in virology, the podcast about viruses, the kind that make you sick.
From Microbe TV, this is Twiv. This week in virology, episode 692, recorded on December 10, 2020.
I'm Vincent Rackeniello, and you're listening to the podcast all about viruses. Joining me today
from New York, Daniel Griffin. Hello, everyone. How's it going, Daniel?
Today was a long day. I think it's getting pretty bad, and we'll talk about that. But
let me start with my quotation. Wise men say, only fools rush in, but I can't help falling
in love with you. Now, some of our listeners probably know who that is by. That's Elvis Presley.
What people may not know is that he is referring to the polio vaccine when he wrote that song.
Are we going to exhumed and revaccinate him with SARS-CoV-2 vaccines now?
We probably didn't want to do it on this show, but let's do it. I just want to let everyone
know Elvis is actually still alive, and he's returning for a COVID-19 vaccination next week.
Well, you can see it here, right? No, I'm joking on that. I wish Elvis was still with us. What a
tremendous, talented individual he was. But let's start a little bit. I'll get back to why that
quotation. Why are we not quoting Winston Churchill? Why Elvis Presley? But we will get there. But I
just sort of bring some people up to date, patient updates. Everyone keeps seeing these numbers,
but I like to put a face on the numbers. We actually, Vincent and I were together on a call
about a week ago, actually, this last week. And Shane Crotty was on, and he was talking about
issues with reinfection. There were a couple of physicians on, and Shane Crotty's data is
really great and all. But we're seeing reinfection. I think I've talked about that a few times.
My partner today called me and we discussed it a case. This was a gentleman who was admitted
originally back in March, had a pretty severe case of COVID. And now they're back in the hospital.
They're septic. We did a COVID PCR, and it was positive, right? So pretty hard for me to say that,
wow, what is this? 10 months later, that that's somehow persistent from the March of 2020.
So we're seeing cases and number of physicians were on the call saying, we're seeing these,
but we're busy. We're in the trenches. We don't have samples from March and April to do the genetics.
So this raise a concern. Don't think that just because you had it, you don't have to worry.
There's a certain percent of people that are getting reinfected. We don't know what percent
that is, but we'll see as we go forward. Had another gentleman, and this brought me back to
the Irish patient. I don't know if people remember. People who've been longtime listeners may remember
the Irish patient, a young man in his 30s. And I felt like it was back to March again, admitted
another gentleman in his 30s. No past medical history, really sick. Basically did the same things
that we learned from our Irish patient. The person was so ill that we had to intubate him. We had
to lay him prone. He's really on maximal vent settings. And we're hoping that he's going to make
it through this, but really, really sick. People have another sort of myth perception out there.
Oh, the virus isn't so bad this time. Yeah, it's bad. We're seeing the aftermath of Thanksgiving,
which for me is kind of tough because now we're admitting families, right? And we admitted a couple
sisters. One of them died Monday morning. Her sister's still alive, but on a ventilator.
And today I admitted a mother and she was quite upset because she said, you know what, Dr. Griffin,
don't worry so much about me. What I'm really worried about is my daughter who's right here
in the room with me. The daughter went to see her mother-in-law for Thanksgiving. The mother-in-law
actually fainted on Thanksgiving and then was diagnosed the next day with COVID. They were
trying to help the mother-in-law. Everyone was trying to do the right thing. People were wearing
masks. The mother-in-law was wearing a mask. They took the mask off the mother-in-law,
sort of helped her kind of feel better, got her to the hospital. But that whole event led to her
getting sick. The mother getting sick, basically the whole family is sick. So,
I guess I'll move right into the pre-exposure period with this. I try to keep giving people
the facts so they can make their own decision. You know, it's difficult when people make bad
decisions. And I see the consequences of that. We're here for you. We're going to take care of
you. I'm here to educate you to give you the information you need to make the best decisions.
But just keep these facts in mind when you're thinking about what you're going to do tonight
is Hanukkah. Coming up soon is going to be Christmas, Kwanzaa, New Year. So, people are making plans
now. We had over 3,000 people die in the US just yesterday. Things are really bad out there.
And we're going to get to the fact that the vaccine is really right here on the horizon.
So, let's try to make some good decisions. Also in the pre-exposure period, let's go
back to the schools, right? There was a nice article in the CDC MMWR. This was implementing
mitigation strategies in early care and education settings for prevention of SARS-CoV-2 transmission.
And you looked at eight states in the period of September through October. And that's the
time to look, right? I mean, I've seen studies where they talk about infections between like
April and September. And schools were closed. I don't really know what, you know, what you make
up stuff with that. But this was a really good article. And, you know, the CDC has been beaten
up a lot, but there's really some great people. And they're really putting some great information
out there for us. And this article described the role of mitigation for Head Start programs. And
people in the US probably know the Head Start, but the rest of the world. This is a really tremendous
program. There's Head Start and Early Head Start. And these are programs for kids five and under.
And it promotes early learning, healthy development among children. And what did they do here? So,
they provided quite a bit of guidance, information on masks, personal protective equipment,
the physical setup. So, you could do this in a safer situation. Supplies for actually maintaining
those healthy environments and operations. They even sort of, actually, there was financial aid
in all this, helping them get additional staff members so that they could have smaller class sizes.
And when they implemented all these programs, they actually saw very few cases of transmission
among the children and the staff members. So, just sort of helpful to see, you know,
we went into this, we didn't know, and we're learning, can we do things that make it safer
to be in these environments? And I think just more information that we can. I always know that this
triggers sort of a wedge issue, sending kids to school or not. And so, I always try to make
the qualification that this tells us that you can do it safely. It doesn't say you are doing it
safely. So, if you're looking at having kids in in-person learning environments, you can't just do
it. You can't just make believe it's, you know, 2018 and stick 30 kids, you know, a couple of
feet away from each other. This was a study showing that you can make it safer with proper
mitigation, with spacing. And now, we're seeing in a lot of areas, they're really introducing
testing, actually, becoming a big issue here in the New York area because, as people probably are
where our rates are really climbing, you know, and I look on the map and I see that where I live,
I now live in a red area. That doesn't mean we're socialists or communists. It means we've got way
too much COVID. So, we need to, if we're going to ask those kids to go to school, if we're going to
ask those teachers to be there and teach our kids, we got to give them the necessary resources,
the necessary guidance. Can't just, can't just send in those folks. All right, vaccines. You know,
Vincent pulled me away. It was like, you know, the Super Bowl, I had gone into extra time,
and then Vincent's like, it's time to record Twiv. So, we'll get what was going on right before I
jumped in is the FDA was having their EUA meeting and discussing what to do with the Pfizer vaccine.
I know a lot of people are thinking actually about the time this drops will know, you know,
the outcome, the final score. And it does look as though there will be an EUA for the Pfizer
vaccine. And the discussion was just about what will be the definition, what will be the confines
of that. So, we'll go through a couple of things here. But before we get into vaccines,
I want to point out we're getting here near the end. You know, we're in the 11th hour. I know
everyone's exhausted, but I want to tell a story. And hopefully this story is something that maybe
gives people a little bit of thought about, my gosh, I've got to keep safe because we're almost
there. So, this is a story that I asked my mother to retell this past week. And it's the story of
my grandfather's best friend, my mother's godfather, Howard Miller. And this takes place. It's 1945.
This is a true story. Howard Miller is at the Rhine River in Europe, right? It's World War II.
He's a captain in the second armored tank division. I don't know if people realize,
but 1945, that was when World War II finally ended. So World War II had just come to an end in
European theater. News of the German surrender is spreading across Europe. This day in 1945,
Howard gets up just like any other day, not knowing that the war is already over. The news has not
gotten to him yet. He's killed by a sniper after the Germans had already surrendered. So,
I feel like this is sort of a message for our listeners. The vaccine, by the time this drops,
the vaccines are here. We're going to start rolling these out. I want people to take a moment
and realize that Tuesday, November 8, 2020 was our modern V day, our modern vaccination day.
And really this week, mankind's war against COVID started to end. And vaccinations have started in
the UK. They're going to be coming here in the US in coming days and weeks. So they're going to
be spreading around the world. All right, let's go to where we are with the vaccine. The UK started
to administer the Pfizer vaccine. Canada approved the Pfizer vaccine. And by the time this dropped,
there will be some sort of an FDA EUA for the vaccine here in the US. Right? As I sort of got
on this, there was the discussion at the FDA, not about whether or not to give approval,
but what qualifications to give approval. So was the vaccine going to be just go ahead,
everyone can have it? Or we'll talk about a couple of the issues that were being discussed.
One was, will there be a lower age? So, for instance, the first question that was put forth
was 16 years of age and up. The bulk of scientific evidence supports the safety and efficacy of
this. But then there were a couple discussions about, well, 16, 17, should we make it 18? Should
there be something about that lower limit of age? The other was, since the plans are in the US to
vaccinate high-risk individuals, so healthcare workers, long-term care facility people first.
Should the EUA be limited to those high-risk groups, allowing more data to be generated before
it goes out to a wider audience? So, we will hear what sort of the final decision is. But
little things that we've learned in the last few days here, there was a 92-page brief
that I actually have to say I enjoyed reading through. And then today was a full day. A lot
of really hard questions asked advisor, nothing surprising, nothing concerning. A couple things
we now know. The vaccine is preservative and adjuvant-free. I almost feel like that should
be on there like advertisements. People are always worried about the vaccines. Is there
some preservative in there that might cause problems? Are there adjuvants that might cause
some sort of issue? And historically, we think of vaccines without adjuvants as maybe being
safer, maybe having less issues. A couple things from the immunology front, the two-dose regimen
elicited a robust neutralization antibody response. The titers were actually comparable and higher
actually than individuals who'd recovered from COVID-19. And in addition, I got some questions
about this the other day, it generated a strong CD4 and CD8 T cell response. There was reduction
in the risk of getting COVID-19 as early as 10 days after the first dose. There were some common
reactogenicity reactions. And we're going to touch on what is reactogenicity. But most people
said, hey, at the injection site, it hurt. Got poked with a needle, was sore there. I'd say
about half the people, a little bit more felt tired for a day or two. Headache was actually quite
common. People feeling sort of muscle aches, chills, joint pain fever. Fever was about 14%.
And one of the things that I mentioned is interesting. I don't know if a lot of people
realize this, but they actually included adolescents down to the 12 and 17-year-old ages. So we had
we had data not just on the older individuals. And that was why this was being discussed.
There actually were adolescents included in the study hundreds of them. So we have data there.
Want to address some of the fears here that were addressed in the last few days. It was
noticed when they went through the thousands of people that got the vaccine that there were four
cases of Bell's palsy in the over 20,000 people that were vaccinated. This is pointed out that's
actually what we see as a background in the population. So that was not above background.
So that was not considered in any way to necessarily be associated with the vaccine.
The other, which is interesting. I don't know if people are following this, but there's this
idea that if you get the vaccine, then you'll never get pregnant. Actually, it doesn't get
the vaccinated people when I hadn't got pregnant during this short period of time. So I thought
that was kind of interesting and reassuring. There's an interesting, and I'm going to talk
about reactogenicity here. So let's define the word first, and then I'll get more into it. So our
words for today are going to be reactogenicity, anaphylactic, and anaphylactoid. So reactogenicity
is basically the evidence you get that your immune system is responding to the vaccine. So that
might be local redness, soreness at the site of injection. That might be that feeling kind of
a little crummy. And if our listeners have gotten a shingle shot, this seems to be a very similar
experience. One of the concerns that people had is, Oh my gosh, if I get the vaccine,
I'll be out of work for two days. I don't think we're seeing that. That's not what we're seeing,
but it'll be great to have personal experience where we can talk to people who've gotten it and
actually say, you know, Francis, Dr. Griffin, were you laying on your back for two days? Because I
have a very low discomfort tolerance. There was sort of the interesting, you know, several young
men were claiming that they got such bad chills from the ultra cold vaccine, that they were shaking
so hard that their teeth were shattering and cracking their teeth. I tried to explain that
the vaccine is brought up to room temperature before you get it. So that seems entertaining
more than anything. But the other, and this has come up anaphylactic versus anaphylactoid.
And so I immediately got a call yesterday morning from one of the allergists in our area.
And there was a concern, a couple of the people in the UK who got the vaccine had allergic reactions,
right? And the difference here is between anaphylactic and anaphylactoid. So anaphylactic
is when you have antibodies, you get something, it triggers this severe reaction. Anaphylactoid
is more along the lines of what was being described, something where they got Benadryl.
It was a non-immunoglobulin mediated allergic reaction. There's discussion that here in the
states, if someone has a history of issues like that, we might suggest taking Benadryl before the
vaccine. And the way I was talking about that, should there be some kind of qualification
about people that have a history of anaphylactoid allergic reactions to things,
maybe just sort of alerting people. So I will move forward from there to what is really on the top
of people's mind, actually, I have to say. I know in the media, they're talking a lot about
vaccine hesitancy. But at this point, we're in the less vaccine relative to demand.
Some point will be into some other concerns. And this is an area where now we're talking about
equitable distribution. And so who gets the vaccine first? And the world is watching, right? So we
want to make sure we do this the right way. So I'm going to talk specifically about New York
States vaccination program, because the way it works, right, is the ultimate decisions are going
to be based at the New York State Department of Health. And we've been getting updates on this.
So high-risk healthcare workers, nursing home residents, and staff will be the first New Yorkers
to receive the vaccine. So what does that mean? So what are high-risk hospital workers? Not everyone
in the hospital is at the same risk. Emergency room workers, right? Particularly, we'll say
nurses, non-physicians, right? I think they spend a lot more time. I think anyone has ever interacted
with the healthcare profession. Your nurse spends a lot more time with you than the doctor.
So the nurses, the doctors, all the support staff, similar ICU. So all the ICU staff,
nurses, all the assistants, the pulmonary department staff, and New York State expects
all high-risk hospital staff. We'll get the vaccine actually within the next week or two,
right? So we're expecting to get vaccine here in New York next week, if this, well, when the EU
goes through, which we all expect. And then it's going to follow, right? It's going to go very
quickly to the long-term and congregative care staff and the residents there. And it's going
to be interesting, who's giving the vaccine to whom? So the big pharmacy chains have stepped up
across the nation. So CVS, Walgreens, I realize correction, Dwayne Reed is the drugstore, Dwayne
Johnson is the rock, but throw that in there. And then it's going to move out to other physicians,
other staff working in the hospital, and then it'll move out to essential workers, general
population, et cetera. But this is an interesting, I'm going to tell another little story here
about who gets first. So I was having a conversation earlier this week with the majority leader of
one of the legislative bodies here in our great country. It was not Nancy Pelosi. And this gentleman
was saying to me, well, you know, Dr. Griffith, it's obviously a no-brainer that we got to get
these vaccines to the hospitals. Because, you know, when you get COVID-19, that's where people go.
And he told me a story about how a secret service individual, you know, was talking,
there's a couple of aspects that I think they're really interesting to our listeners. One is
saying, you know, the secret service person, you know, where in the gloves, where in the mask,
he's very safe at work. So it isn't that we're thinking that it's a risk for the hospital workers
being in the hospital, though I think it is. What happened in this case was this individual's
child got infected, the wife got infected, he got infected. And now a critical person
is sick and going to the hospital. So we had a little bit of a discussion. I was actually
surprised. I think our listeners know this, but I pointed out that the majority of people who get
COVID never actually go to the hospital, that 80, 85% of people we care for in the community.
So raising the issue that as we look at the critical people that we need to make sure we
keep them healthy and protected, we've got to be looking at our primary care docs.
We've got to be looking at the people that work in the urgent care centers.
And not just the doctors, right? Think about the receptionist who's working there at the
urgent care or the busy primary care practice. Think about the nurses, the medical assistants.
Basically saying if we don't protect those people, if we can't keep them healthy enough to take
care of that 80% that we manage in the outpatient setting, and we leave them with just the ER as a
place to get care, we're going to drown. So it's a very interesting conversation as we go forward,
we'll hear more about how this all works. And I'll be talking more about our, we'll say our
pro-health riverside tri-state vaccine initiative. But once we get past these easy to vaccinate
people, I think, people working in the hospitals, urgent cares, medical practices, long-term care
facilities, I say easy. More challenging is we going out to the communities, right?
When we move from phase one, right, to these high-risk individuals, when we start moving to
people that are 65 and older, when we start moving to teachers, critical workers, so police,
firefighters, et cetera, you'll be hearing more about a lot of organizations like ours are jumping
in, reaching out to the state saying, we'll be a solution. We'll produce high-throughput
vaccination access sites where people can do drive through like we did back with the H1
and N1 vaccinations. Let's get as many people vaccinated and protected so we can move forward.
All right. Now let's move. I'm going to skip a little bit past that incubation period.
Actually, I won't skip so much. The CDC updated things where they basically said once you've
been exposed at day seven, if you've got a negative test within 48 hours, you can end that quarantine
a little bit earlier. We haven't quite embraced that in New York City or New York State, so
we're still stretching out the full thing, or at least we're recommending. No one's listening.
We're aware of that. But once you actually go ahead and actually get detectable virus, what do you
do? Or what do you do if you think that's the case? And the NIH has a nice page now really
basically pointing out that testing saves lives. So when I was talking about how we're going to roll
out the vaccines, I was talking to a lot of our urgent cares. Some of our urgent care centers
are doing over 6,000 COVID tests a day per site. I mean, this is really amazing.
And if you look at our positivity rate being five or six percent, I'm going to do five percent.
The math is easier. You're talking about 300 people testing positive at one of these sites,
each of these sites per day. This was huge when we went into Thanksgiving.
All of those people testing positive being pulled out and not going to that Thanksgiving dinner.
Think of all the contagion that you're stopping by identifying people who are positive.
So this is really critical. And there's really a push. Now, don't just get tested when you have
symptoms. Testing saves lives. It identifies the spread before it happens. And this is really
critical in being embraced. And actually, a lot of people, I think it's taken a little bit longer
than it needed to, but embracing rapid resulting. So what are we doing? This is sort of a four doctors.
We're doing rapid antigen testing at most of our sites. We do Abbott ID now at some of them as well.
We often send off a PCR as well. What sometimes happens, right? 6,000 tests. You don't tell everyone
to sort of quarantine while you're waiting for that PCR. But some of the time that antigen test
is coming back negative, but the PCR is coming back positive. We're catching some people in that
ramp up phase. We're catching some people sort of after the fact in the ramp down phase.
But what we're doing then is basically calling them up. Your PCR came back positive and then
sort of moving forward with that. So that's going to happen. When you're doing 6,000 tests per site
per day, a certain number of those negative antigen tests are going to be people that are early
enough in disease that you're getting a few hours before that antigen test term is positive.
So the early inflammatory phase. This I touched on a little bit above and just to reiterate,
it was actually interesting when I was talking to the majority leader. He was shocked when I said
that 80% of people are managed outside the hospital. They actually challenged me. Where did you come
up with that number? I was a little surprised, actually. But I think that as someone told me,
well, 80% of the focus has been on the hospitals. People are not aware of all the people out there.
When you look at 240,000 people in a single day being diagnosed with COVID,
they're not all going to the hospital. If anything, we're getting above that 80%. We're getting
better and better at managing these people outside the hospital. So what are we doing?
We're still recommending the first week, just symptomatic management. We've eased up. You can
take your leave, your ibuprofen, your Tylenol to treat those viral symptoms. We are encouraging
people to wait until the second week to consider steroids. We're limiting steroids to people who
have issues with their oxygen level dropping. Actually here in New York, we're setting people
home with post-oximeters, 15, $20. That's a good way for us to then manage them. Just speaking to
a physician friend of mine who's in that second week where each day we're checking in to see where
his post-ox is. It's in the high 90s still. As long as it stays in the high 90s, he'll continue
to take his aspirin a day, try to stay active, stay off the steroids, stay off the antibiotics,
and just manage them outside the hospital. This is critical because you can't send everyone with
COVID and a fever to the ERs. You can overwhelm the system and when you do that, no one benefits.
We did see the formal, peer-reviewed publication of the repurposed antiviral drugs for COVID-19
interim, WHO, solitary trial results that came out in the New England Journal on the second.
Again, this is where they looked at remdesivir, hydroxychloroquine, lopinovir, interferon regimens,
and really did not show any overwhelming compelling evidence for mortality,
initiation of ventilation, duration of hospital stay. This is an interesting issue because the
first of those in there was remdesivir, right? A lot of the hospital systems have purchased
large orders of remdesivir here in the United States. I'm actually seeing people get admitted
just for remdesivir, even though they're not hypoxic. I think this is a decision people have
to make. Is the benefit of remdesivir enough that it's worth hospitalizing someone just for that
therapy? Because originally, the idea is it shortened your hospital stay. Here, I have people
getting admitted to the hospital without hypoxia just to get the remdesivir. Here, it's creating a
five-day hospital stay versus shortening a hospital stay. Something to think about there.
We continue to see secondary infections later on. The multi-inflammatory phase,
I think I mentioned last time the individual with the Guian Barre. We gave them the intravenous
immunoglobulin. A few days later, he's squeezing my hands, but then he actually started to get
flasset again. This continues to be a challenge. I have another gentleman. I'm not sure the
connection here, but he was a gentleman who had COVID and then at about week four developed an
expressive aphasia. Really unclear what that is, but the timing is concerning for a connection there.
A number of papers out there, case reports, suggested a connection. What is expressive aphasia?
This is a gentleman where I ask him questions. I go for a while until finally I hit an area,
and he just can't get the words out. He can't tell me. I'll ask him where he works,
and it comes out gibberish. If I let him just talk on his own, he could talk. It sounds like he's
fine. Then I say, you work at GBP. What does GBP stand for? When he tries to say GBP, it just comes
out. I ask him, do you know what GBP stands for? He nods. He knows what. He just can't get it
expressed. Really a challenge. I'm going to sort of wrap out here with our tail phase,
but in the tail phase, I want to talk a little bit about challenges we're having with DC planning
now. The tail phase is very recognized, continues to be a huge problem. Actually, one of the questions
I just got from this physician colleague was his wife, his son. They're both sick. They're an
urgent care waiting to get tested. Should he wait? Should they bother getting that test? My advice
was yes, get that test. We need that objective evidence. But one of the issues that came up
is currently COVID is considered an acute diagnosis, not a chronic. One of the nurses that I've talked
about several times is having issues getting disability coverage because they say COVID is an
acute diagnosis. You had that back in March, April. It's not a chronic disease. If you're going to
look for any kind of support, you need a chronic diagnosis. It's interesting. This has also become
an issue for oxygen. We have a number of individuals in the hospital. We're looking at trying to
discharge them, but oxygen is only paid for if you have a chronic condition requiring oxygen.
Back in March, April, the early days of the pandemic, the governor stepped in. Executive
orders basically said everyone has to cover and supply oxygen for COVID. Interesting that we're
seeing bureaucracy stand in the way of what we recommend as good care. I think the governor listens
to us, Vincent, so he can maybe jump in and give us some help on that. But before we take emails,
let me just say we're continuing to our support of the Peace Corps, HIV and AIDS programs.
Just to point out, we are in the midst of this pandemic. I hope when we get through
the other side, people don't forget about COVID-19 so that we don't go into this unprepared like we
did this time. But there's still a huge pandemic going on. We have not really gotten through the
HIV pandemic. And so go to parasiteswithoutborders.com, help us support them, but also help us continue
our mission. Daniel, have you seen an uptick in influenza cases yet this season?
So there are more influenza cases. There is an increase, but it is actually a much lower
percent of cases, a slower number of cases of influenza this season than we previously. Usually
now is when we start seeing all these flu admissions. But I think all the things we're doing is keeping
flu at a lower level. That's great. That's good. This one maybe one silver lining, right?
Yes. All right, we have some email. Remember everybody you can send an email to Daniel at
microbe.tv. And we've got a lot, but we'll just do a couple here today. This is from Sean. I'm an
orthopedic surgeon in New Orleans and have a friend who's an internist who treats COVID patients.
Yeah, I'm not sure that's what he's supposed to be doing, right? But
he's on regular zoom call clinical updates. He told me that dexamethasone is no longer
recommended to treat COVID. This seems to contradict everything I've learned so far about how dex
is one of the best therapeutics we have. What do you think? Well, I think it's his friend,
the internist who's taking care of the people. So that's good. That's what we want. As I mentioned,
80%, 85%, the majority of people with COVID do not need an infectious disease specialist.
They don't need to go to the hospital. This is something everyone should feel comfortable
managing the outpatient setting in most cases. We usually, as I point out, we don't give dexameth
zone to everyone. It isn't like connect the dots. It isn't COVID dexamethasone.
dexamethasone is reserved for the class for which it was shown to make a difference.
And these are people who are starting to develop the early inflammatory response.
It's during the second week. And it's people who are starting to get hypoxic, right? So if you're
not hypoxic, if your sats are still in the 90s and you're doing well in the outpatient setting,
or even it's the first week, don't give them steroids. Steroids is something that we should be
giving to only a select number of individuals. Is the mortality benefit huge? No, the absolute
benefit is only a couple percent in people with low oxygen requirement, a little bit higher in
people who are more serious disease. But yeah, it's not for everyone. There's a certain place for it.
Okay, we have an email from anonymous in Manchester, UK, who is worried about their dad in Australia.
Her dad had a flu vaccine 30 years ago and developed Guillain-Barre syndrome.
So anonymous wants to know, is there a reason my dad or anyone like him to worry about any of the
COVID-19 vaccines or candidates, no longer gets flu shots? And should I worry since I am, you know,
that's my father. You know, so this has come up quite a bit. And you know, questions about
the vaccine, should I worry about Guillain-Barre? And actually, I think the flu is a perfect example.
We look at people who get natural infection with influenza versus people who get the influenza
vaccine and the incidence of Guillain-Barre is certainly higher with getting natural infection
from influenza. So sort of an interesting thing in a perfect world, there's no influenza, there's
no influenza shot and there's less Guillain-Barre. But yeah, I've certainly seen it in natural
infection with influenza, I've also seen it after a flu shot. But is this going to be an issue for
people who get the different vaccines for COVID? So far, we're not seeing a signal. Pretty soon,
we're going to be having millions of people vaccinated. So by the time, you know, it rolls
out to other individuals, I think there's going to be more data to help us with this.
The next emails from a nurse in a New York City hospital who's been trying to get pregnant for
some months and wonders if she should wait until after vaccination, because the vaccines, I think,
are not being tested in pregnant women. What do you think, Dan?
Yeah, no, I think that's, yeah, no, excellent. I'm going to say, you know, interfere with your
family planning decisions here. Tell your husband to curse me if he wants to have a child immediately.
But as we saw, they excluded pregnant women in the vaccine trials as a nurse in a New York City
hospital. You're right here in phase 1A, potentially going to get vaccinated in the next few weeks,
right? And after the 10 days, you'll have some protection. Three weeks later, you get your second
dose and then you're good to go. We certainly saw people go ahead and get pregnant once they
had been vaccinated. I think I mentioned there were a dozen women that went ahead and did that
in the Pfizer trial. So yeah, just, you know, wait, wait a few weeks, you know, and then go ahead.
That would make sense. You hate to go ahead and, you know, not get vaccinated, you know, when you
could be really mad or just postponing that pregnancy by a few weeks. So that's my advice,
but I'm going to leave the ultimate decision up to you and your partner.
All right, we have the last two are the same question. We have a question from
the FISA and Katherine, whether immune compromised people can be vaccinated.
So that's an excellent question. So a lot of people are asking about this. And, you know,
there's a certain sophistication to mRNA vaccines and concerns about people with autoimmune diseases.
And when you make the RNA vaccines, right, you're basically taking DNA, you're going over to RNA,
and some of the products will be double stranded RNA. So they're early vaccines or the early trials
when they're going through this, they've realized that you were making contaminants of double
stranded DNA. And you really don't want that, right? That's potentially something we worry
could trigger autoimmunity. So they do a really careful chromatography process. They purify and
make sure it's just straight RNA. At least what we're seeing so far, I think it looks like it's
going to be okay to use in these individuals. It is not a live vaccine. That's good. It has sort
of less stuff in there. So we're anticipating that this might be a safer approach. And I throw
that in. Not only am I, at this point, saying like the RNA vaccines, but we have a couple other
vaccines on the horizon, the Chinese with their inactivated, Sino farm. That's one that was what,
86% efficacy, they tell us, we'll see the actual data on that. We've got Johnson and Johnson coming
out either this month or January, actually, so much COVID in the States, Jay and Jay said they
don't have to have 60,000 people. Looks like they'll probably stop at 40,000, just this so much COVID.
And then we'll see even more. But yeah, as we go forward, we're not expecting there to be a problem
here. We like the idea that it's not a, should I say live vaccine, I'll say active replicating
virus that we're injecting people. This is really just that sticky note with instructions for how
your immune system should respond. And we are thinking and the data seems to be supporting that
this will be a safer technology. So right now, if you're say one of these first-line people who
are going to be vaccinated next week, and you have an immune compromise, are they going to give it
to you or no? It'll be on a case by case basis. Okay, there's no general rule. Very good. All right,
that's our 40th from weekly COVID-19 clinical update with Dr. Daniel Griffin. Thanks again, Daniel.
Oh, thank you so much. Everyone be safe.
