This week in virology, the podcast about viruses, the kind that make you sick.
From Microbe TV, this is Twiv, this week in virology. Episode 695, recorded on December 17, 2020.
I'm Vincent Rack and Yellow, and you're listening to the podcast All About Viruses.
Joining me today from New York, Daniel Griffin. Hello, everyone.
Historic Week, Daniel. It is actually, and this time the voting was a little bit quicker,
but I'll get to that. But yeah, let's start because I've got a lot to say,
and we want to keep this under 30 minutes for all the busy folks that want a quick update.
So my quotation, at this historic moment, Shirley, not one of us is too busy, too young, or too old to play a part.
And that was actually King George VI, the father of Elizabeth II.
And he was actually speaking about D-Day. And I think this is appropriate, right? We are now
launching massive vaccination campaigns. And this is going to take a lot of effort,
a lot of coordination, and a lot of people are going to need to be involved to make sure that
this actually goes from manufacturing to actually people's arms. So start a little bit with some
patient updates. I think everyone realizes that the projected post-Thanksgiving rise is what we're
seeing. We're setting records, numbers of people who are getting sick, numbers of people who are
dying per day. It's quickly approaching 4,000. It's well over 3500. And I'm not in the best of
moods when my patients die. And I had earlier this week, gentlemen, no medical problems in his
30s who died, just had another gentleman died today. I have a teenager in the ICU who I don't
think she's going to make it. So this is a horrible disease. Each one of these people who dies is
someone that people love, that people care about. The vaccine is here. I just heard about an ICU
nurse who just got diagnosed today. And I mean, the vaccines are here. So I know it's Christmas.
I know everyone's hoping to get together. But I'm going to be the Grinch, right? And I'm going to
say please, you know, postpone Christmas. Can we do that? I just want people to be safe.
Yeah. I mean, I try not to be judgy, but when I see this many people dying and you know,
I see families, they got together. They were doing nothing wrong. This is not a moral issue.
This is just, it's really dangerous. So all right, let's go to the pre-exposure period.
And I always like to touch on testing and a little shout out here to Rachel, the special
assistant to the NH director of COVID-19 Diagnostics. She let me know that they appreciate the updates,
you know, because for them, it's nice to get some feedback what's happening on the ground. So
happy to hear that. And I'm going to give some feedbacks here and feedback. Yeah, no plural on
that. Just feedback. This is an update, the FDA updated its FAQs on testing. And I was communicating
a little with one of the New York Times reporters who may drop a story on this, but I told her that
she has until Saturday morning when this episode drops. But actually, the FDA basically went ahead
and said, okay, these tests are not approved. These PCR tests are not approved for quantitative,
saying the quantity of virus. But go ahead, you can share those CT values with clinicians.
And there's a bunch of caveats in there. But for me, as a practicing clinician, this is exciting.
This is a helpful update. And there's a number of qualifications. And I think those qualifications
are appropriate. So what are the things that sort of gives some background here? We use a
measurement of the amount of virus of the viral load, so to speak. We look at these cycle threshold
values when we manage a number of viral diseases. So CMB, cytomegalovirus, we use it for HIV, the
virus that causes AIDS, we use it for hepatitis. And we're used to some degree of variability.
We're actually careful to say, like, oh, are these, we're treading something over time,
is that being done in the same lab, because there can be some interlab variability.
But there's also an extra bit of variability here, right? We're used to doing blood tests,
and someone draws a certain amount of blood, and a certain amount of blood is then put on the
machine. But here, we're actually doing swabs. And those swabs could be taken from different
sites. It could be one of those deep brain biopsy swabs, where it's really pushed in there,
and it's twirled around, sort of a blind procedure. And it could be left in there for a proper,
you know, 15 seconds, appropriate number of twists, where it could be sort of in and back out.
It could be taken from the front, sort of just inside the nose, 15 seconds each side,
making sure you get a good sample, or not, right? It's operator-dependent. It could be actually a
swab from the mouth, or even the back of the throat. So the collection can actually affect
these things. And we know a few things. We know that you tend to get the highest amount of virus,
if you swab deep in that middle-terminate swab, the NP swab that we started with. If you do the
front of the nose, it comes up about three cycles later, right? So about a 10-fold difference.
If you do it in the mouth, it's actually about 10 cycles different. So, you know, there's a lot
of caveats, and we're going to have to do a little bit here to make sure we interpret that. But at
the ends of the spectrum, I think we can make sense of this. You know, if you get the report
that that CT value is less than 24, that you're translating that into millions of RNA copy numbers,
you're probably dealing with someone in that height of infection. You're probably dealing
with someone who's very infectious. This is someone rush home. Don't pass go. Don't go get
those groceries. You can order them. And at the other end of the spectrum, let's say it comes up
37, 38, so past 36. And then we want to ask a few more questions. Was it collected properly?
Where was it from? Because here we want to calculate, is this, you know, due to poor sample procurement,
or is it actually really that they're kind of either the tail end of illness or right in the
beginning? So, you know, the ends of the spectrum, I think we can really work with this. You know,
there's going to be gray areas in the middle. It comes up at about 30. That might be a little
harder to interpret. But for us as clinicians, this is helpful. I had a case, well, I have a case,
gentleman, a gentleman from Nigeria, right? One of the few people who actually appreciates
that I own cows, right? So I showed him a couple of cows, and then he wanted to know how many
wives I had so. And he had actually been sick really for several weeks, right? Two plus weeks.
And, you know, first he tried azithromycin, and then he tried bactrum, and then he wasn't
getting better and ended up in the hospital. And, you know, his first test was negative. But it
just didn't seem right. It really seemed like this was a viral syndrome. We tested again. This
time it was positive. So my suspicion, right, is that it's right sort of on the edge here of
detection probably high 30. So, you know, being able to get a CT value in a context like that,
that's actually helpful. So, oh, and by the way, just one wife.
The CT values are going to be available for all nucleic acid tests. So not, and this is actually
an excellent question, Vincent, not all the machines actually allow you to get those values.
It's actually cheaper to buy a machine that just gives you a yes or no, basically just at the end
of, we'll say 40 cycles says yes or no. The more sophisticated machines, right? Apparently,
the ones that the Broad Institute or the ones that Fauci is using those actually give you CTs
all the time. I hate to say we call them this gentleman, the machine that the assay was run on
did not have access to the CT values. But again, it sort of shows you, you know, it would be great
spend that little bit of extra money and give us something that helps us in sort of figuring this
out. So as I mentioned, we've tried to move a little bit away from those deep NP swabs,
the brain biopsies, but still in some settings, we're doing those NP swabs, you know, particularly
with kids, we like to do it in the anterior inaries, particularly if you're going to be doing repeat
testing, because, you know, the blind procedure, we've had issues with triggering migraines, with
bleeding trauma, things like that. But actually some pretty exciting stuff here. We've really
moved ahead with access to rapid testing. And I don't know if I mentioned last time, but some
of our sites are doing over 6,000 tests a day. And what's, you know, when you start seeing, oh,
five, six percent or tests are positive, we're picking up hundreds of infected people per
site. And then we're actually getting them from spreading it to other people. So that's really
tremendous. I have to say, I'm excited to see this happening. I mean, testing saves lives.
As far as what tests do we have access to, the BD varitor is in reasonably good supply. We can
get reagents, we can get access to that. We have quite a bit of the Abbott ID now machines, but I
have to say I've talked to a lot of my colleagues who, you know, those are back ordered. It's hard
to get those now. There's such demand. There's also some, you know, other tests that people are
hearing about. The Abbott by neck by next now, right? That's supposed to be this $5 test. The
government has heavily invested in that. So most of us in the say the private sector are not getting
access to that. But now an approved at home over the counter test, no prescription needed. And I
think that's fantastic. I don't think a doctor needs to be standing between you and your ability
to get a COVID test. And this is by a lume. And it's a rapid antigen test. And it actually has the
ability has like this Bluetooth connection. And it's really kind of neat. So people, you know,
if you're not driving after this, just go ahead and Google E L L U M E COVID test. And for,
they say $30, you're going to be able to walk into your local pharmacy. You'll, you'll get this a
little kid. There's a video, right? So you're going to use, you need a smartphone, you know,
but you provide that. So you go on your smartphone, you watch a little video, it shows you how to do
this. There's a little sterile nasal swab, you're going to swab your nose. They actually say in the
kit, it's going to be an NP. They're actually going to expect you to put that back in there. So that's
going to be interesting to see how tolerated that is. There's a little droppers and processing fluid.
It connects via Bluetooth to your phone. And it walks you through it and in about 15 minutes,
you get an answer. So we're now sort of increasing the number of options and making it cheaper for
testing in the, in the home. We talked before about the Lucia, a little battery powered molecular test.
Now we have this hopefully soon to be available $30 over the counter antigen test. And there's
actually some talk about the, the binacs now being an at home option as well. So we're moving in
the right direction. We're not quite there at the price point. A lot of us are looking at, but this
is, I think it's exciting stuff. Schools, I always got to talk about schools. Really a nice piece
in the CDC MMWR. And this was titled estimating resource resource costs for implementation of
CDC's recommended COVID-19 mitigation strategies in pre kindergarten through grade 12 public schools,
United States 2020 to 21 school year. And they actually, it was really interesting. They went
through, and you know, to point out, this is not free. If you're going to say we're going to,
we're going to open our schools, we're going to send kids to the schools. You can't just do it
like it's 2019. You've got to do it like we're in the middle of a pandemic if you're even going
to consider this. And they actually went through and they found and made estimates. You need to
invest an average of $55 per student, sort of minimum. But then it goes up to about $440,
you know, with increased staffing, shields, mass hand sanitizer wipes, the pulse oximeters,
signage. So there's a lot involved. This is not just you say, oh, we're sending kids back to school,
we hear it's safe. If you're thinking about doing it, there's there are ways to approach this challenge,
but it takes money, it takes a plan. So I always try to reinforce the point that in-person schooling
is a goal, but you can't just jump there. You get there with education, you get there with resources,
and you know, and financial assistance, right? We dumped a lot of money, I would say into the
stock market. If we think we're going to send kids to school, if we think we're going to ask
teachers to go there, then we're going to actually have to have to put the money in. And I think
this was good analysis of schools can really understand what those costs should be. And hopefully,
we'll say policymakers can make the decisions to make this happen, because, you know, you look
at $440 per student, and you think about that enabling to, you know, parents to work, enabling
that child to get the benefits of education, I'll sort of leave it there. All right, vitamin D and
Ivermectin seems a lot to people want me to discuss this. So here's what I'm going to say.
I'm doing a better job of remembering to take my vitamin D. And if this podcast goes viral and
we get above 20,000 YouTube views, I promise to discuss Ivermectin next week. But we got way
too much other stuff for today. And why do we have too much other stuff vaccines? This has been an
exciting week for vaccines. Last week at Long Island Jewish Hospital, this is where I did my
training, also where I see a lot of patients. The first person, an ICU nurse, received the Pfizer
vaccine. And this was exciting, right? I mean, I think I was, you know, I'm always critical,
right? And so I'm looking and the fact that it's an ICU nurse and not a physician, I thought that
was pretty cool. The fact that physician was giving the vaccine seemed a little odd, because I'm not
sure we know how to do that. That's actually nurses are much better at that. So, but somehow
that doctor did well and the nurse claimed it didn't hurt. So we'll take your word for that.
And there was there was the tall Irishman, Michael Dowling, the head of Northwell was there. And
yeah, that was nice that, you know, there there's the Irish there. So, you know, we always sort of
the side of history. So that was exciting. Were you there, Daniel? Did you go?
No, no, you know, I actually was busy taking care of patients.
Okay. You know, and I did make the comment like, yeah, this is great that you've got the
media appearance. But come on, let's start pushing out the vaccine. It's here. Let's get it into
arms. Last week was all about Pfizer. And this week, the focus changes to Moderna. And so what do we
do about what do we know about Moderna? And as people may remember, last week, when Vincent
wanted to start Twiv, I was like, I can't. I'm watching. It's the vote. And so I did watch it again
today. You know, I guess I'm a, you know, if people listen to Twiv, they should have been tuned in.
If you want to hear a bunch of really smart nerds talk about stuff, it was great. I was loving it.
And they really, these are brilliant scientists. These are, you know, and it's not just scientists
and people looking at, you know, the whole equity aspect, etc. And what do we know? We got efficacy
data out of this. And it's right about, you know, the same as Pfizer. It's right about 95%
for preventing people from getting disease. Talk a little bit about what I mean. And they
really said it looked like it's close to 100% at preventing severe COVID-19. So I'm going to go a
little bit into that. People also are always interested in the immunological data, I guess I'll
say some T cell responses. So we know that we're getting great antibody responses. But they also
commented that the CD4 positive T-rays T cell responses were strongly biased as we wanted
towards TH1 cytokines, minimal TH2 cytokine expression. And so this is reassuring, right? Because this
is our way to predict the future. We're going to have any issues, vaccine induced disease.
As far as reactogenicity, hopefully our listeners remember this. This is not a side effect. This is,
I got the vaccine. And this is, you know, evidence that my immune system is working and evidence
that I can feel when people poke me with a needle. So it's pretty similar. The majority of people
said, yeah, it hurt when they stuck it into my, to my deltoid, unlike the nurse who claimed
the doctor poked her with minimal pain. You know, it's funny. The majority people,
the two days afterwards said they feel tired. Well, it's not funny, Dr. Griffin. What was funny
is that actually, if you ask the placebo people somewhere between a third and a half said, yeah,
I feel tired. So just to say, I haven't gotten my vaccine yet and I feel tired. So fatigue was
very common, but only lasting usually a day or two. Headache was reported, muscle pain,
some joint pain, some chills, and then a minority of people had fever. But again,
this was more after the second dose than the first dose. And interesting enough, the older you are,
the less you complain, the less reported side effects. And this seemed very similar when I went
through the numbers with Pfizer. What came up a bit in the discussion today was the issue of
Bell's palsy, right? There were a few cases of this in the Pfizer study. There were three cases of
this in the mode RNA vaccine group and one in the controls. And there was a whole discussion
about whether is that really background? Can we really say that with confidence? So that's
something that will be being monitored. Another part of the discussion that was quite interesting
and this will be addressed going forward was the issue about correlates of immunity. So what
they're hoping the Moderna vaccine trial will do is actually give us the ability to do blood
test to tell, do we have to worry about someone getting infected again? Also, it may help us with
timing about re-vaccination. And it was a slightly different discussion than Pfizer because
really this trial is being financed by the US government, right? This is very much under
Operation Warp Speed. So several times they'd say, well, we are paying for this trial. So this
is what we would like. Very interesting. But here are our vocabulary for today. So we have three
words I want people to learn about infection, disease, and severe disease. So I'm going to throw
in, we got a little bit of information about infection. I think this is important because
this is going to tie in with transmission. So the end point was not whether or not people got
infected. The secondary endpoint was not whether or not people got infected. It was whether or not
they get disease or whether or not it was severe disease. So what's infection? Can you get infection
without getting disease? And this is I think an important point. Our 12 listeners probably know
this, but it's good to sort of go through. So you've got the elevator response ready to go.
Sometimes a pathogen, a virus in this case, can actually infect us, use the same wording,
can actually go and start replicating. But we don't know it. We have no symptoms. We have no
fever. We have no headache. We are infected asymptomatically. The concern there is that if that
happens, if the vaccine does not prevent that, you could have people getting infected, walking
around feeling fine. They've got the virus replicating in their nasopharynx. They might wipe their nose,
they might talk, they might potentially transmit it and they feel fine. They're coming to work.
So there actually was a little bit of suggestion. Some data here was discussed on the last 12,
if people want to listen to that, that there may actually be a protection against infection.
And that's ideal if we're ever going to look at herd immunity. The second is disease. This is
you get sick, right? This is a subset of infected. You have the virus doing its thing and you either
have a sign or a symptom. Either you have a sign such as a measurable temperature, an abnormal chest
x-ray, or you have a symptom. You feel bad. You've got a cough. And then severe disease in COVID
really means that your oxygen level drops that you require hospitalization. And so in this study,
we saw some preliminary suggestion that there may be a decrease in infection. We saw some really
compelling evidence of about a 95% reduction in disease. And we saw what looks like close to 100%
protection against severe disease. So this is exciting. And they actually talked about moving
forward. They're planning. They talked about this at the beginning today. They're planning a
transmission study with the mode RNA vaccine this fall at university campuses, which I thought was
really interesting. So they're going to take a campus. These will be individuals who maybe have
not been vaccinated yet. And they're going to have half of them get vaccinated. Half of them
not get vaccinated. We blind it all the rest. And they're going to do really close contact tracing.
And they're also going to do repeated swaps looking at levels of virus. So very important
questions when we talk about herd immunity. Because if a vaccine protects you against disease,
but not infection, if it doesn't knock down levels and interrupt transmission,
then we really have to step back. We talk about herd immunity.
Daniel, what was the percentage in the prevention of asymptomatic infection? You didn't give us that.
You gave us the disease. I know. I believe it was 67%. Is that correct? Am I remembering that?
Yeah. So it's not great, right? So a lot of people are still going to not be protected from
infection, right? Yeah. And I think actually, I'm glad you, you know, so 67%. That's a problem.
Because if if it's only 67% and it's a binary system, is that enough to get us herd immunity,
right? If you say, OK, 100% of the population agrees to get vaccinated. I'm not sure what planet
that occurs on. And it's 67% effective at blocking infection. That's like right at the edge of
giving us herd immunity. You drop down to 90% and you're probably below herd immunity. So this
is a problem. And I think maybe sort of, you know, and the transmission research is so important,
because infection is one thing. But let's say you get infected, but it's at such a low level
you can't transmit. That's OK. And so I think that's what we'll get. Hopefully this fall.
No, it's actually people probably wanted to know that 67. So thank you.
All right. So we're getting lots of questions, right? The vaccines are out there. First question
I always get is Dr. Griffin, which is better. Is it Pfizer or Moderna? And we were joking about
this because, you know, saying, well, you know, it's kind of like the Android phone versus the,
you know, Apple iPhone, which one I get. I said, kind of like the Moderna, right? I think it's got
sort of nicer packaging, you know, the way Apple does that thing. And I said, but you know, to be
honest, if someone called me right now and said, Hey, Dr. Griffin, we've got your Pfizer
dose come running down. And I was like, yeah, probably just go get it. And so, and of course,
that day, like I got the call like, Hey, you know, Dr. Griffin, you want to schedule your Pfizer
vaccine as a guest. So I think the data is pretty compelling. You know, they're very, very similar
as far as efficacy as far as safety. So I, I think when you get your golden ticket, as we say,
the doctors are nurses and staff are getting their vaccines. I go ahead, take the opportunity
to get the vaccine. What about pregnant or breastfeeding? And this is, you know, this is an
E way. It's not a fully FDA approved vaccine. So I don't think we should be fighting with
anti-vaxxers. And the anti-vaxxers shouldn't be fighting with anyone at this point. We have not
tested this vaccine technology in pregnant or breastfeeding women, you know, humans, or even
animals for that for that matter. So it's unknown. There's there's no mechanism to think this is
an issue. There's no signal to think this is an issue. As we talked about last time,
the, the scientific advisory board and the FDA has made it really clear. This is a woman's decision.
This is not a man's decision. It's not the FDA's decision. The information is there,
and women have the ability to make this choice. And as we move forward, we're going to learn more.
So if you're, you know, if you're an ICU nurse and you're, you're involved in people getting
intubated and you're in high risk, or maybe you work in an ER or an urgent care, you may decide
I want to, I want to go right now. And, or you may decide, you know, hey, I'm, I'm doing more
administrative stuff. I have limited patient contact. You may decide you want to wait a little bit. So
again, we, that's, that's what we have. And people are, I think it's important that we respect
people's decisions here. What about autoimmune disease? We have seen no signal suggesting there's
a problem here. So again, the encouragement is, it seems, you know, that, that the scientific
evidence and totality favors vaccinating, getting vaccinated. What if I previously got infected?
I'm going to talk about that a little bit, but I think it was very clear in the discussion
today by the independent scientific advisory board. I just sort of to quote, is we know people get
reinfected. We sometimes see the reinfection is worse than the primary infection.
We actually had people get a mild case and then die the second time. So the encouragement was
that you should go ahead and get vaccinated. We have no, no correlates of immunity. There's no
blood tests that we can do right now to tell you you're going to be okay. What about distribution?
I was asked about this. Right now we still don't have as much product as demand. But that's going
to, we expect to quickly change, particularly, it sounds like we'll have six million doses of
Moderna or mode RNA vaccine coming out next week and other three million of Pfizer will ship.
And so I think that I think pretty soon we're going to get to the point where we can meet that
demand. And there's really a lot of people, as I mentioned, all hands on deck to try to make this
happen. As there have been some reports, I think three allergic reactions to the Pfizer vaccine.
Can you illuminate? Yeah. So the one in the US, I think that got a little bit of press as they
gave it to an individual up in Alaska, right? And there were a couple in the UK that early on.
So there is that that warning that we say that if you have had a previous
anaphylactic reaction to a vaccine, you should speak to your physician,
consider premedication, don't just sort of run in there and get the vaccine. And I think that's
the important. It is a previous severe reaction to a vaccine. It's not egg allergy. It's not,
I have issues with pollen. It's not peanuts. It's not an antibiotic issue. It's just, you know,
and that's the question. Have you had a previous severe reaction to a vaccine? If the answer is no,
you can move ahead. After you get a vaccine, you shouldn't you be observed for 15 minutes to make
sure nothing happens? Yeah, they've actually extended it in a lot of the places here to 30
minutes. But the recommendation is observation for a minimum of 15 minutes. And as we learn more,
we'll see. But yeah, that's recommended. The two shots, right? So the Pfizer-BioNTech is a 0.3 milliliter
shot, given 21 days apart, you get a second shot. So it's two shots. Interesting thing people have
probably heard about is, Oh my gosh, there's more doses in that vial than we knew. So I'll
talk a little bit about that. I was asked one of our pharmacists who's been actually reconstituting
this today. And these vials, when you actually thought of there's about 0.2 milliliters of
liquid in there about 0.2, right? So there's a certain amount of the product in there,
and there's a certain amount of volume that that comes up. You add 1.8 milliliters,
you can do the math. That gives you about two milliliters. They're always slightly overfilled.
So you say, well, I'm going to do the math in my head here, Dr. Griffin, 0.3 times 5, 1.5,
that leaves half a milliliter of fluid in every vial or so. And that's what was actually noticed.
So Pfizer was alerted. Pfizer said, listen, we're not going to give any specific recommendation,
but your hospital might make a decision about this. And what a lot of the hospitals have done,
and the health care system where I'm working, has actually said they will draw an extra dose
out of that vial, if possible, if there's an extra 0.3 in there, which there always is.
And sometimes there's even another dose in there, because we say about 0.2. So sometimes it's
about 2.1 at the end. But they do say, don't draw a little bit out of 1, a little bit out of another
worried about cross-contamination infection risks. But that's the mystery there. The Moderna is
actually a slightly larger volume. And we've always talked about from a nursing point. We have to
be careful that people are just sort of straight with how much they draw. So the Moderna is 0.5 ml,
so it's a little bit larger amount that goes in. Again, two shots, about 28 days apart. And then I
guess just to wrap that off, Pfizer is being sent around in those cool thermal shippers.
They monitor until they arrive and then switches over, someone else monitors it. So they can
actually be kept in those thermal shippers. So we're not going to necessarily need everyone in
the world to have an ultra cold. Moderna can be shipped around at negative 20 and then kept in
a fridge. We think it's going to be for about a month. So good stuff there on excess and getting
it around. All right, incubation period. I want to make sure I hit this. Remember, a test does not
predict the future. Just on the phone again with a dad who said, you know, his one son got sick,
tested positive, isolated for his 10 days. You know, he and the other boys had a test a couple
days after the first son tested positive. So, you know, his comment was, we should be all good to
go. And it's like, actually, your last contact was, you know, 10 days ago. So you're still within
the 14 day quarantine. That test a couple days after your son got sick, that doesn't quite work.
Naturally, a CDC has said you can finish that quarantine at day seven with a negative test
within 40 hours. New York State's still sticking with its 14 day quarantine. And I have to say,
we're being really strict. I got, you know, another call from the NHL with it was this,
this, you know, question about, you know, do they have to be PCR negative? Or can we switch over
to this 10 days 21 days? And I know if people are familiar with this, but in youth hockey,
something about the dynamic of the ice makes it the highest risk situation for transmission
of virus from one person to another in a sporting context. So still sticking with a
really strict no tolerance policy for professional hockey. So expect another great season next year.
Period of detectable viral replication. Here I'm going to talk about the other type of vaccination,
passive vaccination, right? And this is the type of vaccine that the president, Ben Carson,
Chris Christie, Rudy Giuliani, and now many, many other people are getting. And I'm now starting
to see a significant number of people who go for this. Some of them end up in the hospital,
right? This is not 100%. First person I saw was a gentleman, right? Got it on day four,
two days later, felt great. Another gentleman got it on day nine. Didn't really notice much,
ended up in the hospital. But we're seeing a lot of people get this. The earlier they get it seems
to be consistent with what we knew from before. The suggestion is, if you get these monoconal
antibodies within the first week, there's about a 70% reduction in progressing to hospitalization.
The U.S. government is actually distributing 65,000 doses every week. But only about 20% of
them are getting used. So there's a problem here. Hopefully people are listening to this.
Let's get the word out. So the BAM linibimab, the BAM BAM, is really widely available. But
people don't know about it, actually, to the point where even people that don't qualify
are actually getting it through a lottery system because the hospitals are sitting
with these vials not being used. So Eli Lilly has a place. You could actually go to the Eli Lilly
page. And there's numbers. And actually here in New York, I get lots of calls. I send them the
hotline. There's a hotline you call. I just had another patient today, actually a fellow clinician,
elderly gentleman or senior gentleman. I don't know if elderly is the right word, but an older adult above 65.
And he was being arranged to get the BAM linibimab in fusion today. So this is one of those tools.
This does have some data behind it. And as people may know, I'm working on a trial, a post-EUA
trial to really get solid data. This is still EUA based on phase one, too. We're hoping to get
more solid data to move forward with this. What about reinfection? So I wanted to ask this question.
I wanted to say, OK, so what about reinfection? And what I wanted to really be curious about,
do people get reinfected and potentially shed it to others? So we now have a lot of cases
in the literature of really well-documented reinfection. So what I wanted two things.
I wanted them to be young. I wanted them to be in their 20s with no medical problems.
And two, I wanted them to be health care workers. So I wanted them to be in a situation where,
potentially, they got it. They got it again. And they also, you're ready. My last was,
I wanted CT values. I wanted to know, did they have enough virus that I would be concerned that
they would transmit? So I found a nice article by Gupta V et al, asymptomatic reinfection in
two health care workers from India with genetically distinct SARS-CoV-2. One was a 25-year-old man,
PCR positive 5th of May, 2020. CT value at the time 36, right? So a few thousand bits of RNA when
he's initially diagnosed. They isolate him. They wait till his PCR is negative. They get him back
at work. August 17th. Now he's got a positive PCR with a CT value of 16.6. So that would be
millions and millions of RNA copy numbers. So something we would think that we'd be worried
about for transmission. Other 28-year-old woman found PCR positive also back in May. CT value
at that point in the 20s. She did the institution. She became PCR negative. September 5th. CT value
of 16.9. So again, very high levels of RNA. So this raises the couple issues that we got back
to with our vocabulary. This was an issue of reinfection. They were asymptomatic. So there was no disease.
There was no severe disease. But they had really high levels suggesting potential
for transmission in these settings. Early inflammatory phase. I want to reinforce the timing of steroids.
I got to call the other day. It was like, Dad, the steroids here to be doing really well for our
patients in the hospital. I got a person who just got COVID. Should I call in a script for steroids?
Steroids are the second week. They're in select individuals who are hypoxic, who are starting to
develop more significant disease. They're not for everyone. It's not COVID steroids. It's just
select people. It's a select dose. A little judgment here. Secondary infection phase.
We talked a little bit about the ferritin procalcitonin ratio. But I want to point out that the timing
seems to me to be the most helpful. I just had a woman today. Procalcitonin was less than 0.05.
The FPR, the ferritin procalcitonin ratio, was super high, suggesting not bacterial.
But she had staph aureus in the blood. Why can't it went up? She wasn't looking right.
So I still find that you want to be vigilant. You want to understand the phases of disease.
And when something starts to change, think about the complications that happen in that phase of
disease. The tail phase, which often ends up with the long COVID, I was actually speaking with a nurse
this week. It's really tough. We're seeing individuals who are now six, seven, eight months out,
really getting pretty far out from initial disease, still suffering. And some of the employers are
starting to get tired and say, hey, what's going on here? And I think we talked about this a little
last time. There really isn't a great chronic diagnosis here. It puts these people in a really
tough situation. But it's very clear. COVID is not just binary. You can get sick. You can die.
You could get sick. You could not die. And you might have prolonged suffering. You might have
prolonged disability. So I want to leave it there. I want to thank everyone for all the hard work
everyone's doing. Hang in there. Keep doing it. And for everybody who's been coming to parasites
with that borders.com and helping us. That's fantastic. Thank you. We're continuing to help the
P scores HIV and AIDS programs. Because remember, that virus has not gone away. All right, Daniel,
a couple of quick questions. First one is Ellen from Johns Hopkins, assuming one has been vaccinated
and then becomes infected with SARS-CoV-2. One, do we know the degree to which that person's virus
shedding is infectious? And two, can that person become a long hauler? Oh, that was fantastic.
Because that hits right into what we were talking about. We don't know yet. And we're going to get
this data. This is actually the planned transmission studies that we heard about. They're going to
be taking individuals and vaccinating, comparing them to non-vaccinated individuals. And they're
actually going to be doing quantitative viral load testing and coupled with transmission
contact tracing. So we're going to get answers to this. We don't know yet. And I think this is
really critical. A lot of people I saw this early on in the pandemic, they get the COVID.
They'd say, oh, I'm fine. The mask would be off. They would feel like they had some special
invisible magic shield. We don't know. The vaccine may protect you from infection. We've seen
evidence for that. It seems very compelling that it infects you from disease and severe disease.
But we don't know. You could very well get infected. You could have high enough viral
level that you could then infect your loved ones of your patients. So until we know that,
you got to keep washing your hands. You got to keep wearing your mask. You got to keep acting
like we're in the middle of a pandemic. All right. So Alan asked about allergic reactions after
vaccination. We already covered that. So we can skip that. And then Dr. Hasanane says,
can someone like President Trump who received monoclonal antibodies get the vaccine now?
Or will he have antibodies that may neutralize the spike protein once formed?
Yeah. So we think that that's a concern. And we're actually recommending that people wait
90 days. And that's based upon, we'll say, the half-life of the monoclonal
bammative about by Eli Lilly is 21 days. So we're waiting for that to get low enough.
Because otherwise, the concern is you get the vaccine and you actually will not get the benefit
of vaccination. The half-life is pretty similar for the cocktail from Regeneron. The GSK product
hasn't made it to market yet. That doesn't even longer half-life. So that may really
prevent you from getting active vaccination for some time. But the current recommendation is to
wait 90 days. One more from Nicholas as a health care worker myself on the front lines every day
who has suffered from COVID-19. What are the recommendations for vaccination? Should I move
myself to the back of the list since I may have antibodies? Are there any concerns for
someone to get the vaccine after having suffered from COVID-19?
Yeah. So there's two questions here that I'll sort of tease out. One is there's no risk that
we're aware of that a person is going to get the vaccine and have a problem because they had
COVID before, right? And Pfizer had a number of people who had been previously infected,
get vaccinated, the chat-ox study, the Oxford AstraZeneca also had a similar where people were
fine to get the vaccine. The other is a prioritization issue. Should I get this? Should I wait and let
all my colleagues get it first? The hospital's health care systems, this is a monumental challenge
to get everyone vaccinated. I've basically been telling people if they call your number,
if your golden ticket comes up and it's time to get vaccinated, go ahead, get vaccinated.
Try to get all the health care workers at least their first dose this month. So just go ahead,
keep the logistics flowing. Make sure you jump in the lifeboat before we run out type thing.
So don't wait. Just go ahead, get vaccinated. I'm encouraging people to do that.
That's COVID-19 clinical update number 41 with Dr. Daniel Griffin. Thank you, Daniel.
Oh, thank you. Everyone, take care and be safe.
