This week in virology, the podcast about viruses, the kind that make you sick.
From Microbe TV, this is Twiv, this week in virology, episode 698, recorded on December 24,
2020. I'm Vincent Rackeniello, and you're listening to the podcast All About Viruses.
Joining me today from New York, Daniel Griffin. Hello, everyone.
I should say the vaccinated Daniel Griffin, right? Yes, yes. I feel very excited and privileged
for two reasons. One is to get the vaccine, but also the fact that I have had zero side effects.
But I want to take that with a bit of humility, because some people, as we know,
some people have had fevers, headaches, soreness, the reactogenicity we talked about.
I count myself lucky on multiple fronts. When did you get it yesterday?
Yesterday morning, 915. No soreness, no malaise, no fatigue, no pain at the injection site,
none of that stuff. Vincent, I went to the pharmacist who gave it to me and I asked,
was I in the placebo arm? What happened? How come I don't feel anything? No, just a joke.
Well, you sent me a video. And if you don't mind, we'll insert it in right now so people can see
it. Does that work? Okay, that's great. People can watch. You're wearing your COVID socks. Yes,
got my COVID socks. Those are my COVID socks with COVID toes.
How was that? I didn't even feel a thing. Oh, that's good.
All right, so we're going to have you monitored for about 15 minutes. I'm going to write the
time down. They're going to monitor you on the other side. And so Daniel, you have to go back
in two weeks for a booster, right? So actually, I did the Moderna shot. So it will be four weeks,
four weeks before I returned. Excellent. Congratulations. Well deserved.
And people people asked, right? You know, my, you know, what's going on here? You know, Biden and
Pence got Pfizer, you and Fauci got Moderna. It was what they offered me just. Yeah, it's what
you can get. Whatever they offer. Someone said, someone said last night, you know, the way I look
at it, whatever beer is put in front of me, I drink that one. That was one of your Irish friends,
I take it. Probably, yes. All right. Well, we have a lot to go through today. And I know around
the holidays, people are going to be busy. So I don't want to want to take too much time. So let's
go right for it. All right. Start with my quotation. If you judge people, you have no time to love
them. And that's a mother Teresa quote, which I think is hopefully appropriate for this time of
year. Now, over the last year, I've quoted Winston Churchill many times, and I'll do that again.
I've also quoted Ursula K. Le Guin, Taylor Swift, Ruth Bader Ginsburg. And now this is actually
the second time for mother Teresa. I always try to pick a quotation that sets the tone for what I'm
going to be speaking about. And actually, many years ago, and it is many, when I was working in
Kathmandu, Nepal is actually invited to work with Mother Teresa. And in my usual, I was much too busy
doing other things and missed that opportunity. And she's a complicated woman like many of us. So
I just thought that that was an appropriate quote for this time of year. So let's go through,
and also for what I'm about to say, as far as patient updates, I think people are probably aware
that things are not going well in the United States right now. We've had many days now with
over 3000 deaths per day. Some of our hospitals have gotten so busy that you've probably heard
word that there's actually triage of medical care, where there's concerns with that enough
hospital bed, not enough ICU's patients in the hospital are being encouraged. If they don't look
like they have a good chance to be put under hospice care, put on morphine, drips, comfort care,
it's this is not good. This is not what we want to see around the holidays. So it is heartbreaking.
But there's lots of travel going on right now in the US. And lots of people are actually getting
together for the holidays. And what I like to point out is that shaming does not actually help.
Shaming actually increases bad behavior. So people have made plans. People get together. So I think
our role as physicians is to be helpful. What can we do to help people? And one of the things
that I keep reinforcing is frequent testing. If someone gets tested, that's not a free pass.
But if that test is positive, that person is hopefully not going to go to the Christmas dinner
or the New Year's party. Some people go to that New Year's party anyway. So that's something
to keep in mind. If people do get sick, we're going to talk about some of these therapies
as we go forward. But this is a time to have conversations. Talk about what you've learned
if people have had vaccines. A great time to share your experiences over the holidays. If you're
going to be communicating or seeing in person ones you love. Talk about monoclonal antibodies,
other things. I think it's important to have dialogues. We've got to stop, I think, breaking
up into camps. So schools, not much here. We're actually on Christmas break here in the US.
And if we can only speed things up, we can get those teachers vaccinated very soon.
We'll talk a little bit about the change in the hierarchy, the phases. Everyone is now
in phase one, A, B, or C. So we'll talk about that. And the UK variant, just in time for the holidays.
And this has been covered quite well. But I thought a story right here would be a Christmas
story would be appropriate, a holiday story. I was on a FaceTime call with a, I'm going to say
a friend of mine. It's actually the parents of one of my friends. But I think that I'd become
friendly with the parents. And we actually have sort of had a connection through the pandemic
because it was actually in January when it was my friend Gareth's father. Actually, yes, you know,
what does Dan think about this whole virus thing? And we looked back at the text at the time and
it was, yeah, I think this guy actually may be falling. I think this is going to be a significant
issue. So I was talking to him a little bit about what's going on in there in the UK. I see these
numbers rising. He's like, I don't understand. We're being so careful. You know, when I go to
the pubs every night, all the windows are open. You know, when I'm when I'm riding on the bus,
all the windows are open. When I'm on the train, everyone wears a mask except when they're eating
or drinking, I always try to have something to eat or drink because I don't like wearing the mask.
And the wife and I, we were planning on going out to Christmas Eve dinner together. But the tables
in the crowded restaurant, they were all going to be spaced apart and the windows were going to
be up, but we're going to wear our jackets. We were going to be very safe. And I said, well,
what did you do today? Well, apparently, bars has decided to shut down the country again tonight
at midnight. So we all ran out to the supermarkets to get all our shopping done. And it was so nice.
We got to see everyone. Everyone was out shopping. And so I, I don't think you need a UK variant
to explain what's going on as far as spread in the UK at the moment. Thank you, Daniel,
because I have to say, first we had the D614G variant more transmissible. Now we have the UK
variant supposedly more transmissible and another UK variant supposedly more transmissible. This
ain't the way viruses work. Something's amiss. And I hope they sort it out. I just.
But Vincent, as you heard, they're being so careful when they crowd in the pubs for their
beers, the windows are open. How could the virus spread in such a setting?
Thank you, Daniel.
Now, last time I promised I would touch on vitamin D and hypermectin. And I think it's
important that I comment on this because I don't want to leave a vacuum. Why isn't Dr. Griffin
talking about these two things? So vitamin D is going to be very straightforward. The last time
I spoke about this was October 4th. And we had reached a million deaths in the world from COVID
at that point. I think I'm echoing what, when I think about you said very simply, there's no
good reason to be vitamin D deficient, right? And we know that particularly in northern
climbs in the winter, the incidence of vitamin D deficiency goes up. There does appear to be
a consistent correlation between people who are low in vitamin D and getting infected. There also
seems to be now several studies suggesting that people with low vitamin D have worse outcomes.
We haven't shown benefit of giving vitamin D once you've ended up in the hospital. So
this looks like something you want to you want to be doing ahead of time if it's going to be a
benefit. So since this is going to drop after Christmas, I there's a rumor that Santa Claus is
putting vitamin D in my children's stockings. So take your vitamin D. There's there's no reason
to be deficient in vitamin D. There's no evidence of harm. And you know, maybe there's a benefit
here, right? We're seeing a number of studies. Now, what about Ivermectin? And I'm going to say,
this is this is a little bit more complicated. And I get this question quite often because as
people who listen to this weekend, parasitism are aware that I'm actually a parasitologist
and prior to the pandemic, I was actually probably one of the few physicians in the US that was
using Ivermectin on a regular basis. So extensive experience with this medicine prior to COVID-19.
So what is Ivermectin? And this is, I got to say, a fun story. I mean, in the late 1960s,
there was a Japanese microbiologist gathering soil samples, growing things up,
testing them for any, you know, active compounds being produced. And near a golf course in southwest
Tokyo, he collected some dirt and actually was able to grow a bacterial species, streptomyces
Avermectilis. And this bacterial species actually produced an active component,
Avermectin. This was chemically modified to Ivermectin. And there was a collaboration here
between Satoshi Omora in Japan and William Campbell, who actually has been on, he's been on
TWIP actually, or TWIP, he's been on TWIP. So he actually received the Nobel Prize for Ivermectin.
And what is Ivermectin? So it's actually a compound that binds to the glutamate-gated
chloride ion channels, which are found in inverbate nerve muscle cells. This leads to
increased permeability of the membranes, hyperpolarization, and eventually death of
the parasites that we classically use this in. So what's going on with an anti-parasitic agent
and COVID-19? December 8th, Pierre Corey, he's a pulmonologist, critical care specialist,
testified before Congress about Ivermectin. And he went through a lot of studies that have
been done to date. And he's actually part of an organization, the Frontline COVID-19 Critical Care
Alliance, which was started by Paul Merrick, another critical care specialist. And I have to say,
I know these physicians actually have emailed, I've co-authored a couple papers with them,
they're bright academic clinicians, they're who care passionately about their patients,
they're not quacks, they're not lunatic fringe. These are people who are in the trenches,
seeing people die in front of them and desperate for a solution. So how did Ivermectin and COVID
get started? It goes back to actually a paper we discussed on Twiv, early on, right, April,
the FDA approved drug Ivermectin inhibits the replication of SARS-CoV-2 in vitro.
And I'll be honest, I felt like that was a dishonest title. It is FDA approved, but not for
COVID-19, not for inhibiting replication of SARS-CoV-2. So immediately I was flooded with,
wow, there's an FDA approved drug for SARS-CoV-2. I was like, well, yeah, not really. And there were
also some concerns about concentrations being used. Could this be actually realized in a human
host or something about 10,000 times the amount of what we normally would do? So I did not like
this article. Actually, I felt like it was misleading in the title. But it did start to raise a bunch
of questions. It got people interested in Ivermectin. And it sort of raised the issue, well, what do we
think Ivermectin is going to do if they're going to be using it? And I would say you can't eat the
entire cake and still have it. Is the thought that Ivermectin is an antiviral? Is it anti-inflammatory?
Is it boosting the immune system, right? Because we want one or the other timing would matter.
Does it do something entirely different? Are we using this in, I'll say, areas of the world with
heavy parasite burden? And we're actually treating parasites and maybe that might be born out.
So back in July, some of my other friends, and these, I'll say even closer friends, hung out with
these folks, published a paper, COVID-19 and dexamethasone, a potential strategy to avoid steroid-related
strong alloyties hyper infection. This was published in JAMA. First author was William Stauffer.
I actually met him in Thailand up near the Burmese border. I was staying at the Queens and Malaria
station. So he and I hung out there for a few days and swam in the river there. You had to go
make sure you knew where the king cobra was before you went in. And also, Pat Walker was there. She
was the prior president of ASTMH. And we spent about three weeks together. This is back in the
summer of 2016 in Thailand at Cambodia, went to Angarwa. I think she was there when I ran the
marathon with the princess. And what they actually were raising this concern, and I think our
Twip listeners will think about this and it will ring some bells. What if this dexamethasone,
what if the steroids that are now being encouraged to be used in COVID-19 are being used widely
throughout areas of the world that have parasitic issues, particularly stronger loyties? And our
Twip listeners, what is stronger loyties? You have to listen to Twip now. Many parts of the world,
we say 10 to 40% of populations can actually have a chronic infection with this parasite.
Some areas of the world, I'm going to say Egypt, Bangladesh, parts of Peru, particularly parts
of Peru with an HDLV, a viral co-infection. They can have rates as high as 70%. So when you start
giving these people a 10 or a 15, because I've seen longer courses of steroids, you actually,
we've presented some cases, you are at risk of triggering a strongly hyperinfection. These
parasites can actually come through the bowel wall. They can lead to a gram-negative sepsis and
death in many standpoints. So they actually, at that point, were raising the issue, not thinking
of an antiviral effect, but thinking about a lot of parts of the world, you may have a mortality
issue from this and the use of steroids that supersedes any benefit you think you're going to get
from steroids. So when I started hearing and seeing all these ivermectin publications,
it started actually making me look into this issue. Where are these studies? Peru, Egypt,
Bangladesh, India. And as some of our listeners may know, particularly with a colleague of mine,
Dr. Karapati, we've been managing and trying to help assist management of patients remotely in
parts of the world like this in India, particularly. And it is kind of amazing what goes on.
Once they heard about steroids, a patient will get 10 days of steroids. They'll get ivermectin
at one hospital. They won't be doing well. They'll transfer to another hospital. They'll get another
10 days of steroids. They'll get another five days of remdesivir. So it's actually kind of
an interesting, complicated issue. And I know these clinicians are seeing these studies come
out of parts of the world. And there are some small randomized control trials and they're
a little difficult to sort out. There's a cyclin still in there. There's azithromycin,
hydroxychloroquine is still being used in these areas. So I think there's potentially an
interesting story here. My understanding is there's a few studies that will be coming out in in
January. So I look forward to getting more information. I don't quite understand what's going on here
right now to be completely honest, which is tough, right? Because having, you know, having said that,
I mentioned in the US 3000 people are dying a day. If I had an individual from an area of the world
where there was a high incidence of strong alloys and I was starting steroids, I probably would want
to check a strong alloys serology. I probably would want to check the stool for larva. I think
it's worth sort of trying to understand what's going on here. But don't run out and grab your
veterinary Ivermectin. Don't start taking the medicine that your dog or your cat are supposed
to be taking. But I think there's a back room here right now. There's clinicians at the bedside.
They have patients dying in front of them. They're trying to figure out what to do.
And I think it's important that I at least raise this. And as we get more information,
I'll return to it. But just to say, Ivermectin is a very broad spectrum anti-parasitic. We use it
for algo-circiasis. People may know about the river blindness mass drug campaign. We use it for
strong alloys, eschariasis. We use it for nathostomyces, hookworm, lice, matinelli, scabies. That's
off-label, by the way. Ucheria bancrofti. There's actually some studies showing it can have an
effect on malaria. So there's a lot going on here. And I'll be very curious to see what sort of
pads out. But just to say, these are not fringe physicians. These are passionate bright people
trying to figure out how to save lives. And I think we need to work together and figure out
what to do. Can I ask you just quickly? Yeah, go ahead. Is it likely that we're going to have a
double blind, randomly controlled clinical trial for Ivermectin and COVID-19? Or is it going to
just be compassionate use right off the bat? You know, so it is FDA approved, which means that,
you know, if you make a judgment call and want to give this to a patient in the context, you can.
There are randomized controlled trials that are going on right now. And actually, there's several
of them that are going on here in the US. So we will have data. And I know that sometimes,
and we've kind of gone through the different approaches to medicine, I really am swayed by a
well-done randomized controlled, blinded study. I don't think you could just know what works.
I think you actually have to do the science. And we're going to be getting this. Vaccines,
right? So active vaccines. I saw a very curious, I think it was an anti-vax post. I'm not sure,
actually. And it was where a person was saying, you know, you people with your vaccines, instead
of a vaccine, couldn't we just expose people to a weakened version of a virus and then let them
develop an immune response to it? And you know, I was thinking minutes and I'm like,
don't we call that an attenuated vaccine? Maybe we're just mixing words here. We do.
So I thought it was interesting. But, you know, big news since we last talked, I think everyone
is aware, E-way from Moderna. I actually got my Moderna here. But what about prioritization?
This keeps changing. Who gets the vaccine when? I mean, the first thing that's been in the newspapers,
and I think this is upsetting to all of us, is how slow the rollout is going. 10 million doses of
vaccines have been distributed. Only a million have ended up in arms. That's going to take us at
this rate, like 6.6 million years, now 6.6 years to vaccinate the entire US population.
The UK, they're doing about 140 k a week. So they're basically going to finish vaccinating their
country a little bit after the time that they have to start again. So we really got to pick up
the pace. One of the challenges is right now, we're in phase one A, where we're trying to do
healthcare personnel. And a lot of the healthcare personnel that I've started with are what are
considered higher priorities. So ICU, ER, and they're working in visiting hospitals. The vaccines
have been sent to those busy hospitals. So it's really challenged for these facilities to try to
vaccinate all their workers. And at the same time, take care of more COVID patients that they've
ever had before, triaging staff and personnel and resources. So I'm hoping we learned from this.
Maybe that's not, you know, no chiefs keep throwing stuff on the top of the hospitals during a
pandemic. Let's see if there's other organizations that can jump in and help. But the prioritization
changed as of December 20. So let's get everyone up to speed. Phase one A, right? That's we're
familiar with. That's long term care facility residents and staff that fired up this week. And
that that looks to be going well, a captive audience, right? So that that is going to be, I think,
for us in the acute care settings, a game changer. That was what flooded us in the first wave in
New York back in April. Half of the deaths were in individuals from the long term care facility.
So if these individuals could be protected and the people that take care of them protected,
that's huge. The healthcare personnel, I think that's really important from a raw standpoint.
I think a lot of us have learned how to take care of ourselves. So in the UK, they're not doing it
the same way in the UK. They're focused on the older individuals. But we've got the older
individuals here in the US right behind this phase one B, which is now individuals who are 75 and
older, as well as frontline essential workers. And I'm going to go through what is a frontline
essential worker? Then we have phase one C, and that's everyone age 65 to 74, or anyone under 65,
but with a high risk medical problem, and all the other essential workers. What are frontline
essential workers? And I'm hoping as I go through this list, people are going to say,
I want to sign up and be one of those for, well, because now they realize that this is a frontline
essential worker, or two, they think if I'm doing this job, I get vaccinated early. So either way,
first responders, those are the firefighters, the police. What about the EMTs? The EMTs are
actually supposed to be in 1A, so they should be being done sooner. Education, right? These are
the teachers, the support staff for our schools, the daycare people. That's right at the top of
our frontline essential workers. But we also move into people working in food and agriculture,
you got to eat, you move into manufacturing, people working in corrections, the postal service,
people who are transit workers, public transit workers, grocery store workers. So that's about
30 million people in the considered frontline essential workers. And then in one C, you move
into the other essential workers, as well as those younger 65 to 74. And that's going to be
more transportation, logistics, more food service, construction, finance, IT and communication.
Okay. Actually, we talked about that. I think about our medical practices. If the IT goes down,
that's a problem. People working in energy, legal, public safety, wastewater.
So, and then what are those high-risk medical conditions? It's cancer, kidney disease,
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, heart conditions, immunocompromise,
obesity above a certain level. Pregnancy, interesting, is a prioritization in one C,
sickle cell disease, diabetes. Couple challenges that we have in front of us, right? We're not
meeting the first challenge of getting the first shot in, but these are two dose vaccines that we
have in front of us. And the literature that we have from other vaccines is the majority. People
don't get that second dose. This is critical. We keep reinforcing this. If you only get one dose,
you may only have about 50% protection. We also don't know how long it lasts. And we're probably
never going to do great studies on that. So really commit, get that first shot, get that second shot.
I'm getting lots of vaccine questions. And so just to go through a few of them, still the
lactation question is about fertility. But going forward, we're going to actually be
hopefully just posting because the questions continue to flow on what are the different issues.
I'm going to jump right from active to passive vaccination, which really sort of falls into the
second stage back to monoclonal therapy. And here, again, it's a difficult issue. It's out there.
I said with the active vaccines of the ones that are out there, only 10% have actually ended up
in people's arms with the monoclonals. Only about 20% have ended up in people of the ones that are
sent out. And it's a couple issues. One is an access problem with physicians, not the patients,
right? You know, you call your physician, I'm not doing well. You've gotten a test.
Physicians have been involved or health care providers have been involved. Physicians are either
not able to understand how to access this. And the access is very easy, I want to say. I'm actually
going to give you some numbers here. So if you're driving, you could pause, you could rewind.
And don't crash and try to write this down while you're driving, even if you have a Tesla that
is supposed to drive for you. And since a lot of this is our weekly information session for
pro health and Riverside, Optum Tri-State, New York, we have a Long Island bamlinibimab hotline
where people just dial 516-918-6089. Physician calls gives the history. And often they can get
access to the medication the same day. Tensor being set up outside of ERs, other settings.
And nationally to find out about the access in your area, it's 1-855-545-5921.
This is just for Eli Lilly. But Regeneron is sort of right on the heels there. So I'll have
to get access to those numbers once those roll out in our area as well. But what's going on here?
A lot of doctors actually, and this sort of goes back, you know, they're not impressed with the
data. This is an EUA based upon limited data, right? We just did phase 1 and 2. We thought it was
really impressive. It rolled right into EUA. And a lot of physicians have said, you know, this is
not an FDA approved drug. You've looked at it in a few hundred people as impressive as it might be,
you know, with the Eli Lilly with about a 70 to 75% reduction in progression to requiring medical
care in the Regeneron being maybe about a 50% with that cocktail. There really is still that
question of does this stuff really work? So there is plans for a large EUA trial, which I will
definitely share more about as soon as we get the green light from the FDA. Early inflammatory phase,
you know, a reminder, I want to say that steroids are not indicated in the first week. They're not
for everyone. Second week, people with hypoxemia. If we have listeners in parts of the world where
there are co-infections, strungaloidies, malaria, asterisks, other other things going on, keep that
in mind. You know, I think as my colleagues published back in July, if you're going to be using high
dose steroids for any period of time, you've got to be thinking about what else might be going on
there. This was a big change, right? Well, not that, but what I'm about to say is a big change.
We're now sort of reinforced in our recommendation of prophylactic dosing of anticoagulations.
So I think I mentioned before that I'm the infectious disease physician who was
put up to be on the American Society hematology panel to work on the guidelines for how to use
anticoagulation in COVID-19. And after much back and forth and going through 100 to 100 papers,
the ash guideline panel suggested using prophylactic intensity over intermediate
or therapeutic intensity anticoagulation in patients with COVID-19. That's for both critical
and floor patients. But then they did say, so that's your baseline. If you're going to have
an order set, you're going to start people on, let's say it's low venox, that would be your 40
milligrams of sub-Q once a day would be your prophylactic intensity. You might adjust that
based on weight if there's extremes variation there. But then saying on a case-by-case basis,
the panel acknowledges that higher intensity anticoagulation may be preferred in certain patients
judged to be at a high thrombotic risk and a lower acceptable bleeding risk, right? A couple
trials, active, and there are actually three trials, where they were looking at prophylactic
intermediate and therapeutic intensity anticoagulation. And in the patients that were in the intensive
care unit, these are the ones that we think are at the highest risk of clotting, they actually
stopped the routine full dose arms because they were actually seeing mortality impact. So basically
stepping back to, I'll say the guidelines that we've recommended here. But I think this is a
reminder, right? Because the COVID wars, so to speak, that were described in New York Times,
there were physicians who were passionate that if you were not putting patients on full dose
anticoagulation, you were killing them, you were letting them die for science so that you could
just get your answers. And here, we're finally seeing some data. And I feel like this is
solid data. This helps us. I think we're moving forward.
Secondary infection phase. We've talked about this before. This is week three. Things start to go
in the wrong direction. You want to start looking for, is there a bacterial infection? Are we having
progression of the inflammatory process? Or are we starting to have a thromboembolic or
thrombotic complication? Don't just think about bacteria, but also think about fungal issues.
We see these, or we saw these more when people using anakinra here in the States,
there certainly are a lot of these in a lot of other parts of the world, like what I described
in India. In India, we're actually seeing a lot of, not just Canada, but we're actually seeing
mu core, because people are just getting so many courses of antibiotics and high dose steroids
that this set is setting them up for severe fungal infection. So look at the context here.
Be careful with the antibiotics. Don't just keep overdoing it. We're going to lose all our
antibiotics. And the steroids, you've got away the harms. If you have a 70 pound frail woman,
maybe you don't even have to use the full six milligrams. You might drop down to four. I
had a woman today that I put on steroids, but at four milligrams, I may not even go for the full
10 days. So there is some customization here, the trial, six milligrams times 10 days.
That isn't necessarily a one size fits all. That was just a study trying to get an answer
to a specific question. Moving into the end of the segment, I'll say that, but also the tail phase
and DC planning. I just want everyone to keep in mind that when these folks are clapped out the door,
for a lot of these individuals, that isn't the end of COVID. There was a little bit of
attention recently to the fact that if you look at the all-cause mortality, individuals discharged
with COVID are about six times as likely to not be alive at two months post discharge compared
to other conditions. About 10% of them will actually get out of the hospital, but then die
in the next two months. About 15% will bounce right back to the hospital. So it's important.
Don't just clap these people out and forget about them. They need ongoing care. They need
monitoring. They need support. So let's finish off here. I'll say our fund raiser, but I'm going
to sort of spend a little moment here. Our fund raiser, we're now helping to raise money for
the Peace Corps, HIV and AIDS programs. We're all one year older and what have we done while
we've been focusing on COVID, HIV, malaria, parasitic diseases, all these neglected diseases
are really gaining ground. We worry and the estimates are that we may have lost about 10
years. So this is devastating. So here kind of the end of the year, as we're all thinking
about all these other things, help us continue to do our work because when we come out of the
other side of this, there's really going to be a lot of work for us to do.
Right. Thank you, Daniel. I have a couple of email for you. First one is from Bart,
who is confused about PCR testing. He writes, I'm reading various articles suggesting that even
four to five days after infection, note not symptom onset, but infection PCR tests still have
notoriously poor sensitivity. 67% false negative four days after infection in one study. I'm confused.
I understood that the onset of symptoms on average occurred for the bulk of patients around that
time and that the viral load was at its peak just before and after infection symptom onset.
I think PCR is incredibly sensitive if virus is present. So four or five days after infections,
most patients should have enough detectable virus in the body. I thought a PCR test should
be able to pick this up and write result in a positive test. So why are PCR tests reported to
have such high false negative rates? And more importantly, if you're not exhibiting symptoms,
when is the best time to get tested to increase the chance that the test will be correctly positive
if you actually have been infected, please help. So this is well put out. This is not simple.
And so I'm going to go through this a little bit of terminology here to hit on, but also
people are going to have to have a graphic visual in their head. So what are the different terms
here? So there's a point at which a person is exposed. This is the time of exposure.
If you've been exposed and successfully infected, there is an incubation period,
and that incubation period can be from two to 14 days. So you are infected. There is
virus that is replicating. And anytime between two to 14 days, you may or may not get sick.
50% of people never show symptoms. But let's use the symptomatic person as an example.
So let's say you're going to be one of those people who takes the full 14 days before you
get sick. You're going to get sick at day 14. That's about 2% or 3% of individuals will get sick
in the last couple days of that window. The PCR will stay negative on you all the way out to
about 2.4 days before symptom onset. So there's a little bit of a confusion here. What is infection
and what is symptom onset? So the infection is the time that the virus actually gets into
your cells and starts to replicate. It will stay below the level of detection for often many,
many days between, I'm going to say here, one to about 12 days. Because if I say you get sick
on day 14, you're probably starting to get detectable virus by 14. If you get symptoms,
right at the time that you get symptoms is usually when people have, or typically when a person
has the highest amount of RNA, and that's the point when a person has the highest likelihood of
being picked up by one of our testing modalities. Once you get out to about five days post symptom
onset, the virus has really come down. On the way up, it's about 2.4. On the way down, we think
it comes down at about five. But then some people will be positive out to nine. A lot of people will
start to turn PCR negative by day 10. So there's a couple of things going on here. When we talk
about infection and this feeds into a test does not predict the future. You can be infected.
You can be in the incubation period for out to 14 days. And at any point in time, a test will
not predict what's going to happen the next day. In most cases, the virus comes up rather quickly
within hours to a day. But now we've seen more kinetic studies where some people gradually come
up over two days. The other is there may actually be an intermittent positivity, where someone's
positive, negative, positive. We're usually not seeing that till we get down to the lower limit
of detection. So people that have been sick for five plus days, then we'll often see that. Usually
if you can get the CT values, the quantitative instead of the qualitative testing, they're going
to be in the high 30s at that point. Next one is from Carolyn, who writes, it would be great if
you could comment on very promising results with the SSRI fluvoxamine. It seems to act through the
sigma one receptor in the ER, unrelated to serotonin reuptake inhibition and may impact cytokine
secretion and or impact virus replication directly a small outpatient placebo controlled clinical
trial was published in JAMA. There are more data accumulating and she gives some links.
Steve Kirsch, who started the COVID Early Treatment Fund has funded some of the work. Thank you.
Yeah, no, thanks for bringing that up. And I think this is a challenge. I was
worried that I'm leaving things out. And I certainly, certainly am. There's a list of therapies
that are being tried in COVID. And I don't know if I'm at a point where I feel like I have anything
compelling that I can share other than what you did in your email, but we'll be keeping track of
this. And when when something that I think is sort of ready for prime time is something is moving
into practice, or when I'm working with physicians that are using these things and I can relate some
firsthand experience, I will do that as well. All right, our last one is from Char, who writes,
Dr. Griffin, if you keep missing your vitamin D doses, it's okay to take it weekly. If you choose
to use 4,000 per day, you could take 28,000 units on Sunday, because it's an oil soluble
vitamin. If you take it with food that contains some oil or fat, it should all get absorbed.
Yes, an RCT of vitamin D and COVID would be great. But the paper you shared is compelling,
and Dr. Sehult shared a reference list on MedCram, December 10. Also, vitamin D itself is very
inexpensive. So the high cost you're talking about must be the tests and the prescription vitamin D.
I'm always looking forward to your weekly updates so I can share the information. I want you to
stay healthy and continue full steam ahead. And Char is an MD internist, mostly retired, but still
helping where he can in Portland. And Daniel, he gives a number of other paragraphs,
which I will not read, but you might be of interest experienced from his primary care
practice with vitamin D. No, I appreciate it. I think I've been mentioned before. I've actually
been interested in vitamin D for a while. And I love the story of the, I think I related this before,
of the physician in London who was taking care of the Muslim women wearing burkas,
they came with gate disturbances, he tied this to vitamin D. And I have gotten better. My vitamin
D is now I sit it out right next to the toothbrush. So I'm trying to do a better job. I'm a
pasty guy who spends way too much time indoors. So trying to get my vitamin D. My son Barnaby,
he drinks like, I don't know, probably a gallon of vitamin D fortified milk a day. He's going to be
okay. But hey, there still may be some vitamin D in the stockings. All right, that's COVID-19
clinical update number 42 with Dr. Daniel Griffin. Thanks again, Daniel. Oh, thank you. Everyone,
be safe.
