This week in virology, the podcast about viruses, the kind that make you sick.
From Microbe TV, this is Twiv, this week in virology. Episode 701 recorded on December 31, 2020.
I'm Vincent Rackeniello, and you're listening to the podcast All About Viruses. Joining me today
from New York, Daniel Griffin. Hello, everyone. Daniel, it is our 43rd update from you this year.
It's the end of 2020. That's it. Good read-ins. Not to you, Vincent, but to 2020. It has been
what an awful year. It really has. But let's get to it. We got a lot to do today.
So when this drops, it's actually going to be New Year's Day. So we're recording on New Year's Eve.
This is going to be dropping, I guess, on New Year's, so the 1st or 2nd January.
So let's start with our quotation. Should old acquaintance be forgot and never thought upon,
the flames of love extinguished and fully passed and gone, is thy sweet heart not grown so cold,
that loving breast of thine, that thou canst never once reflect on old, long,
zine. And I'll say, old, long, zine, lovely translates as days gone by. So that's that thou
canst never once reflect on days gone by. So this is by Robert Burns. And for me, this is actually
sort of a very, very appropriate poem, shall I say, turned into a song because it was actually,
I was in Scotland. I was in Glasgow in the end of January. And actually, I was there for
Burns Day where they celebrate the Laureate poet, Robert Burns. And that was right before the Chinese
New Year, right before the sky did fall. So patient updates. You know, I think that everyone is aware
of how difficult it has gotten over the last bit of time. And you know, Christmas was really tough
for me to see, you know, eight families having lost someone on that day. And I guess somewhere
in my mind, I had this idea that, you know, Christmas is a day when people shouldn't die,
you know, if there's any sort of greater power than myself in the world, greater power than all
of us in the world. And so just really traumatic that people continue to die, just, you know,
record numbers, growing numbers every day. But what I want to do today, and I know that people are,
people are busy, and I was trying to make this the clinical update for the busy clinician,
but I know a lot of other people listen. But at a year end, I wanted to do an update on what
we've learned this last year. And it really has been a credible year, sort of back and forth,
from really early on in the year, when reports, you know, the risk of coronavirus in the U.S.
is miniscule, worry about the real and present danger of seasonal flu,
articles, coronavirus is bad, comparing it to the flu is worse, to shutdowns, the mask wars,
people threatening to drive pickup trucks into the building if they're, if they're dead,
did not get 8CQ to threats if we did give 8CQ. And then some very strange stuff about bleach
and swallowing flashlights and rattlesnake venom. So we have actually learned a lot,
and let's go through it, really rapid fire. So we'll start off with the pre-exposure period.
And I'm going to talk a lot, actually, about non-pharmaceutical interventions,
which actually I spend a lot of time doing. I'm sort of waiting for, I don't know, maybe the
pharmaceutical bots to be like, Dr. Griffin, why do you talk about so much about non-pharmaceutical
interventions? Why don't you push our drugs a little bit more? But oh, well, I haven't seen that
happen yet. So let's go through it. One, we have a really broad appreciation. Not everyone's on
board, but I'll say a broad appreciation that masks, protect others, and actually they protect
us as well. And please cover those nose holes, unless you're a, I guess, just a mouth breather.
Physical distancing, 6 feet or greater helps. Remember, there's no magical wall at 6 feet. I
think people are getting a little more sophisticated. 6 feet is really what we recommend, 7, 8. It's
exponential, the decrease. There's nothing magic about 6 feet. And if you lean into 5, 4, you're
starting to really dramatically increase your risk. If you can back up, that's better.
Outdoors is safer than indoors. We have a number of studies on this. And it's about a 20-fold
difference in your risk of getting infected indoors versus outdoors. But it's not absolute,
right? Air exchange matters. So indoor at someone's house, a suburban home without good ventilation,
without good air exchange, that's about the highest risk. I bring that up right here around
the holidays. Limiting the size of gathering reduces risks, right? Each extra person
is one extra person who could be bringing the virus into your circle. So the fewer people are
the better. You know, I know this is tough for people that, like hanging out with other people,
which is pretty much all of us. Washing hands, I'm hoping this is here's stay.
Hygiene helps. We do know that we overdid it a little bit with surfaces, your risk of getting
COVID from a surface is really low. We say less than 10% of cases are spread that way. This is really
person-to-person. You're getting it through the air. You're breathing it in. You're getting
it on a mucous membranes. Frequent testing, even of asymptomatic people, can save lives. And we're
seeing more and more data supporting that perspective. Symptom checking helps. But as we now know,
much spread is done by the asymptomatic or the pre-symptomatic. Not saying you shouldn't
symptom check, but just saying we need to keep in mind that that person who looks like they're
doing fine could have the infection. Remember, this is an invisible thing. Being healthy,
eating right, exercising, not carrying that extra weight, optimizing your medical conditions,
not walking around vitamin deficient. These may all help decrease your risk of not only getting
infected, but also surviving if you do get infected. And now we've got good old or, shall I say,
good modern, highly effective vaccines that we're adding to this pre-exposure period.
And in the future, when we actually get to it, I'll talk about the idea of using not only the
active vaccines, but maybe even passive vaccines to try to give people antibodies during high-risk
periods. So there's some ongoing studies there. Schools. We've learned that we can open schools
safely, but also that we can do it unsafely to do its safest cost money. We actually have some
estimates about how much money needs to be spent. If you're going to try to do this in a safer manner,
the safer openings involve limiting class sizes, physical distancing, wherein those masks,
proper ventilation, increasing staffing, hygiene stations, and testing. The whole idea of the
kids taking off their masks to eat in school. That's still an issue for me. I mean, that's
indoor dining. So if the parents shouldn't be doing that, I'm not sure the kids should.
Do I put that as a challenge to the schools? I think I've mentioned there's some schools
here on the South Shore. Did a kids go in the morning, they go home, eat their lunch at home,
another group is doing it in the afternoon. They're doing sort of a hybrid model with remote learning.
I worry. January, February, with really these rising rates, the whole idea of having kids take
their masks off and eat inside the schools, have teachers or higher risk older individuals,
basically in a closed indoor setting with kids with masks off. So I just throw that out there.
We've learned a lot about how this virus is spread. Incubation period, right? So now you've
been exposed and we really have a good sense of what is a high risk exposure. This is your
within that six feet for 15 minutes or longer. It's cumulative, right? You can't walk away and
reset the clock. So 15 minutes cumulative. No mask indoors, as mentioned, is higher risk than outdoors.
Being around a person who actually is in that zone of very high levels of virus. So this is about
two days about, but the WHO and CDC will contact trace four days prior, but about two days prior
to symptom onset. And really, in most cases, for about four to five days post symptom onset,
but that can go out for about as far as 10 days in your mild outpatient cases and as far out as
20 days in your more severe cases. So keep those in mind. Things have been sort of updated and
made simpler. So you've been exposed. We're talking about quarantines to 10 days. We're
also talking about isolation of the infected out to 10 days. So even though we know that
incubation period is really two to 14 days, there's only a few percent past 10. We're trying to keep
it simple. We're trying to come up with something that is reasonable enough that people will actually
follow our guidance. So you get exposed. Anytime the next two to 14 days, you could develop symptoms.
You could become positive. Remember, half of the cases are going to become positive.
They're going to have virus. They're going to potentially spread virus. Never have symptoms.
So we've been learning a lot here. Now, what about this period of detectable viral replication?
So someone's been exposed. The virus is replicating. It is now replicated to the point that it is
detectable. A couple of things here that I really want to try out. I'm going to really work hard
to get the word out. What can we do to keep people out of the hospital? And there is only one
evidence-based intervention at this point. I'll get some emails on that, but I'm going to say that.
And this is an EUA access therapy. This is a pharmaceutical. So pharmaceutical companies
don't have to send me a hate mail anymore. Monoclonal antibody. This is the bamblinibimab
or the bambam made by Eli Lilly. This is the Regeneron cocktail. Ideally, you give this to
someone in the first week out to maybe the first 10 days from symptom onset. If you get this to
people within that period of time, at least the data we have predicts about 75% reduction with the
bamblinibimab of them progressing to require any medical support. So you take someone who's high
risk, we'll say 10% or higher chance of ending up in the hospital. They get this infusion. It takes
an hour. 75% reduction in them ending up in the hospital. And that's key as we know, because people
end up in the hospital, things don't often go well. We also know that telemedicine, pulse oximetry
can really help keep track of these people. So when someone has this diagnosis, we know that
80% and 90% of people can be managed out of the hospital, maybe even a little bit more if we really
get better access for the monoclonal antibodies out there. And what do we do during that first week?
The biggest thing is nothing. No antibiotics, no steroids. We can make things worse during that
first week. We can't really make them better. We want to monitor these people. If you have the
ability to give them a pulse oximeter, or somehow get them access to a pulse oximeter, if they can
track, make sure that oxygen saturation stays above 90%, then boom, they hit week to that critical
week. And then if you have not gotten them access to the monoclonals, or even if you have, then you
start making that decision about is this someone I can safely manage outpatient. Once you get into
the second week, if the pulse ox drops below 94%, steroids potentially can play a role. The standard
would be your dexamethasone, six milligrams, POQ day, times 10 days, prednisone 40 milligrams
would be an equivalent. And then watch them really closely. Most people are going to do okay.
Across the board, an aspirin a day is reasonable, but we don't have really clear guidance on the
best way to protect these people against clots. Your high-risk people will get into this later.
You might consider other therapies. All right. Right at this point, I'm going to jump into the
early inflammatory phase. And later on, don't worry, we'll go back and talk about vaccinations,
active vaccinations. The early inflammatory phase, I started to drift into this with our
outpatient folks, because remember, and I think this is news to some people, but not to our
12 listeners, 80 to 90% of patients can be managed outside the hospitals. Some of those
patients end up in the hospital. You've done all these things. They end up in the hospital.
What do you do? At the point a person gets admitted, there's a number of labs we currently recommend
help risk stratify, help manage them. A CBC, a complete blood count with differential,
a comprehensive metabolic panel, a ferritin, a procalcitonin, a D-dimer, a PTPTT. These are
our coagulation tests, a C-reactive protein, a triponin, and a chest x-ray at an EKG is reasonable.
We really don't need a lot of CAT scans, but we do need a few bits of critical information.
Part of that information is going to come from our labs, but part of it's going to come from
history. I really want to know, can we pinpoint the date of symptom onset? When did this start?
Because timing matters. What was the date of your first positive COVID test? This is going to help
us in management. How are you doing with your oxygen level? Are they above or below 90%?
If it dropped below 90%, how much oxygen is it taking to keep those saturations greater than 90%?
Is it nasal cannula? Is it venturing a mask? Is it face mask? And we'll get back to that.
What about how much weight you're carrying? What is your BMI? Is it greater or less than 30? How's
that kidney function? How is your estimated GFR creatinine clearance? Is it greater than 30?
What about those LFTs, that AST and ALT? Are they less than five times upper limit of normal?
This is going to affect what medicines we're going to consider. What is that
neutrophil lymphocyte ratio that we get from our complete blood count with differential?
Really nice paper recently showing that that really helps differentiate how people are going to do
and particularly dynamic tracking this over time. Nice to have that ferretin
procalcitonin ratio to help us identify that 10% that subset that has a secondary bacterial
infection. But remember, it is a subset. Are they at increased risk of clotting or bleeding?
That lets us make decisions. If someone has a prior history of a GI bleed or they had an
intracranial bleed, you want to be careful with your anticoagulation there. If the person is obese
and has a prior history of a pulmonary embolism or deep venous thrombosis, that's also going to
guide us in management. Now first, what not to do? And I'm actually, I know I'm going to step on
some toes here, but these are our current recommendations. There are a number of things we are recommending
not to give to people. Avoid unnecessary antibiotics or antimalarials. No HCQ, no dioxocycline, no azithromycin.
We do recommend limiting the use of convalescent plasma. There's no compelling benefit there.
It's a very resource intensive item. And the monoclonal antibody is really the modern convalescent
plasma. It's got everything we want, but not all the clotting factors. And as we've really learned,
I think from all this timing matters. Once the person ends up in the hospital, you've missed your
window. There's really a defined window. Anticoagulation, it's a really, we're learning here. Some people
are actually doing some, they call them improve scores, really trying to risk stratify to make
this a little bit more sophisticated. But in general, I'll say prophylactic dose anticoagulation
is recommended over intermediate or full dose, except on a case-by-case basis. When, as we say,
one might escalate to full therapeutic dosing if the clotting risk is elevated and the bleeding
risk is low. And what does that mean? And here we get into the weeds a little. When we talk about
low molecular weight heparin, prophylactic dosing is anoxoperin, 40 milligrams, sub-Q once a day.
The person is over a certain body weight, over a certain BMI. We talked about that earlier.
That might be up to BID. But in a normal BMI individual, the intermediate dosing that comes
partly out of, I'll say, the OBGYN literature, the 40 milligrams twice a day, that's intermediate
dosing that's not recommended. And in some cases, as mentioned, we might do full dose, which would be
the milligram per kilogram twice a day. For the obese patients, that BMI greater than 30,
as mentioned, you're going up to BID. That's not intermediate. That's prophylactic dosing
adjusted for body weight, for your dialysis patients. So you need to know that renal function if it's
less than 50, 15, or they're on dialysis, then we actually consider using heparin with concerns
about accumulation of metabolites with the low molecular weight heparin. And when we do the heparin,
it's 5,000 units, sub-Q, and that's going to be every eight or 12 hours. Certain circumstances,
we might use our direct acting anticoagulants. These are people may be familiar with the
zorelto or the eliquest, the 10 milligrams once a day, the eliquest 2.5 milligrams twice a day.
Again, these things are adjusted based upon renal function and other factors. And in some cases,
people are just using the baby aspirin, 81 milligrams POQ day, sometimes just based upon
an overall clinical picture. But some people are actually, as I mentioned, calculating the
improve, so the international medical prevention registry on venous thromboembolism scores. And
then using these and asking questions about was there a previous clot, issues with paralysis,
cancer, are you in the ICU? Is there complete immobilization? Is your age over 60? And then
trying to weigh that against, you know, is there an issue of an ulcer bleeding in the last three
months? Are the platelets less than 50, right? You're going to want to know about that. Are
there issues with the liver? Are there central venous catheter? So this is all getting a little
bit sophisticated. We're learning a little bit more. As we well know, people who are severely ill
with COVID, maybe 30% of them will have significant clots. But if you put them all on full dose
anticoagulation, you might have bleeds in about 8%. So you got to balance this, right? We're not
saying that full dose anticoagulation doesn't prevent the clots. But you may end up with a net
negative mortality. If you go with full dose on everyone, and that's actually come out of some
recent data, which have actually removed in the ICU arms, people from looking at full dose.
We don't know if that applies to people in the general hospital wards, but we are learning,
and this stuff is being studied, I'm going to say finally. Immune modulation, steroids,
recommended only after the first week. So remember, it's not COVID steroids. It's COVID,
second week, hypoxemia, then you consider steroids. And again, you balance it. You want to look at
the whole picture in a frail, elderly individual. You might consider lower doses. You might consider
shorter courses in someone who is more severely ill, maybe carrying more weight. You might consider
a slightly higher dose. And then that 10 days, you're going to use clinical judgment. We talk
about dexamethasone 6 milligrams, whether it's IV or PO. If they're taken oral medicines,
make it oral. There's no reason to add more IV medications, and prednisone 40 milligrams
would be an equivalent. So some degree of flexibility on doses and duration.
What happened to anakinra, the IL-1 inhibition? What happened to serilla mab,
cetuximab, telosilizimab, all our IL-6 blockade? You know, I have to say, we're still waiting to
see any clear compelling mortality benefit here. The literature sort of bore out what we saw
early on. If you give, and I'll say, toselizimab, in the absence of steroids, people initially get
better. But then by 28 days, the mortality is the same. So limited use here. We look at this as
somebody is heading towards a ventilator. Maybe this will be something that temporarily decreases
their oxygen requirements. But unfortunately, we're not really seeing, say, sort of the early
the early optimism panned out. Something is going on with IL-6 that impact on fevers and
hypoxemia in response to IL-6 receptor blockade is interesting. We're still waiting for better
guidance here. Hypoxemia management. How do we keep that oxygen above 90? And I have to say,
this is a huge area. This is why people need to be in the hospital by and large.
The goal is to keep those sets 88, 90% or higher. You don't really need to crank
them much above that. This gets very sophisticated. And this is actually where our respiratory
colleagues get involved. You start with nasal cannula. Two liters, four liters, you might get up to
eight liters, then escalates to something called a venturi mask, not available in all centers,
but allows us to actually titrate oxygen saturations a little bit. Then we go up to non-rebreather,
high flow nasal cannula, things non-invasive ventilatory methods like BIPAP, pruning. We have
good evidence that that makes a difference, even a mortality benefit, because it's helping us keep
people off the ventilators. This is something even we're doing in the outpatient setting.
One of my colleagues, Ken, that was on a call with earlier today, was bringing up that this is
working in the outpatient setting. You've got an individual, you're trying to keep them out of the
hospital. Maybe they're even on home oxygen. They're laying on their belly. They're sleeping on their
belly. That actually helps with the ventilation perfusion mismatch. In another note, I'll throw
out there that probably a lot of us have experienced, but make sure I share this. Often the pulse
oximeter readings can be inaccurate. If it doesn't make sense to you, consider doing an arterial
blood gas. Anti-viral therapeutics. Less and less excitement over remdesivir as time goes by,
I want to be honest. One of the hospitals here has even started to limit the criteria. For a
while there, anyone who comes in seemed to get remdesivir. It didn't matter if they were hypoxic,
but now the guidelines were just updated. These were actually, I have to say, nice updated
guidelines. You actually saw who was involved in the decision-making, very evidence-based guidelines.
Basically saying remdesivir, if people met the criteria in the one trial that showed benefit,
so hypoxic within the first 14 days. The kidney function, you had a GFR of greater than 30.
The LFTs were less than five times upper limit normal. Then it was five days or less. If you
start the five days and they really are doing better, you don't have to keep them in the hospital
to keep giving them this medicine. Miscellaneous things. We're still seeing a lot of our patients
of vitamin C and thiamine and zinc and vitamin D. People did comment last week that I spoke
about vitamin D for hospitalized patients, but I didn't mention the Spanish study
effect of calcifidiol therapy and best available therapy versus best available
therapy on intensive care unit admission and mortality among patients hospitalized with COVID-19,
a pilot randomized study. I will say, this pilot study did show benefit. There was
an RCT at a Brazil that failed to show benefit. I'll say, there are studies going forward,
including the UK-based coronavite trial. I like the name on that, which is actually fully
enrolled and we'll get data on that unless the pandemic abruptly ends, which it's not doing in
the UK. We're actually going to get data from that. We'll see. I want to be balanced here.
One study that says it works. One study that shows it doesn't show effect. I'll be honest
when I say, as we learn, I'm happy to share that. I'm not weighing on on either side. If a
patient comes in and their vitamin D deficient and you give them vitamin D, that actually seems
like it makes a little bit of sense. Is it going to really make a difference? I don't think so.
I don't know. Maybe it will. I'm just going to basically say, I don't know.
Again, really limit the use of antibiotics because only about 10% of patients have actual
bacterial co-infections in the initial presentation. But we go right into the
secondary infection phase. You get to week two and three. That's when we actually see
patients start to not do well. They start to require more oxygen. They start to have a change
in mental status. Maybe the white count goes up. This is when we want to look for not only bacterial
but fungal infections. We're seeing both. Then this leads right into that multi-inflammatory
system phase where we see a lot of our clotting issues and we see a number of our other issues.
There's really no clear division here, but we run into this tail phase and the issue of
can patients make it out of the hospital. If they are going to make it out of the hospital,
there's a couple of things I want to say. One is at discharge. We are recommending,
particularly in our higher risk patients, extended prophylaxis against clots for at least 30 days,
but then we customize this based upon bleeding risk and risk of clotting.
Some cases, we're still low molecular weight heparin. We're actually continuing that post
discharge, particularly our highest risk patients that may be going to skilled nursing facilities.
A lot of our next level of risk, we're doing the direct acting oral anticoagulants that
doe acts. There's a relto, the eliquis. As we get to a lower risk, it might just be an aspirin
once a day. How did these people do? I always come back to the like, we don't want to clap
these people out and forget them. There was a nice article characterizing long COVID in an
international cohort, seven months of symptoms and their impact. I was posted on the MedRx
server, looked at about 4,000 individuals, 50 countries. Only about 8% required hospitalization,
right? So 90% were outpatient. This is an idea that the outpatients are just fine,
but I'm going to say this study did not suggest that and I will not suggest that. That's not
been my experience. The majority of the people here, these are people who are past 28 days and
still have symptoms. The majority, we're still reporting severe fatigue and cognitive impacts
greater than six months post diagnosis. This was looking at a survey open to individuals 18 years
of age and older who experienced symptoms consistent with COVID-19 in order to be able to characterize
the long COVID symptoms over extended duration. They looked at people and they said, have you had
symptoms more than 28 days and that's who they were looking at. And the people had to have
the symptom onset back in December and May. So I'm going to critical question for me,
is what percent of people who get COVID will go on to have long COVID?
And there was a nice paper on this, attributes and predictors of long COVID, analysis of
COVID cases and their symptoms collected by the COVID symptoms study app,
also posted, and really suggesting about 13% of people will have symptoms that last beyond that
four weeks that fall into the group that was studied above. So we know a certain percent of
people end up in the hospital. We know a certain percent of people that die, in our case,
fatality rate is about 3% right now. But our case morbidity rate, here it's suggesting that
about 13% of people are continuing to have symptoms past that four weeks. And as we saw,
if you look at those individuals out at six months, the majority of them are having cognitive,
they're having fatigue issues. So just to close on this here, in the US right now,
about 12 million cases, we have an outcome for 12 million cases with 3% mortality,
worldwide 60 million cases. Again, about 2 million deaths, these are where we actually have an
outcome. The case fatality rate in the world is about 3%. So that's pretty significant.
And the morbidity, we know that a lot of people that don't die continue to suffer. So I always
want to keep pointing that out. These people, we need to understand, we need to learn better.
We're treating it sort of symptomatically, not really having anything fantastic to offer. So
we need to learn, we need to help these folks. And I will say thank you for everyone that continues
to listen. Unfortunately, this is still going to be going on for a while. We're still doing our
fundraising, try to keep the message out, and also continuing to help support the Peace Corps
with their HIV and AIDS program. So when you get a moment, go to parasiteswithoutboarders.com
and help us continue our work. All right, our first question is from Christine,
who wants to know about the high risk groups for vaccination. Dr. Griffin read off a list,
less 698, that is derived presumably from a CDC document. However, the document actually
divides that risk people into two groups. Those who definitely are at risk, those who might be
at increased risk, the footnote on the CDC page only references the definitely are at risk group.
So that does that mean everyone else in the might be increased risk is essentially delegated
to the back of the line in phase two, asking on behalf of my friends with severe asthma,
my friends with type 1 diabetes, my friends with autoimmune diseases or MS taking immunosuppressants
and myself, a healthcare worker who has been on medical leave for several months and not getting
vaccinated with my colleagues, and will likely be resigning until I can better manage my condition
of POTS, a form of disodenomia, rather than a cardiac condition. So I'm assuming I might
only fall into an increased risk category because of my chronic flu drug cortisone use rather than
the cardiac medication. I also take to manage my POTS. Any light you can shed on that.
Yeah, you know, I have to say, let's be honest, the whole rollout of the vaccines is a bit of a
disaster. And I think this is where this gets like when when will different groups get access to
vaccine? You know, when we look across the country, there was a goal that by the end of this month,
there would be 20 million people vaccinated and maybe it's one or two. So you're saying,
my gosh, look at all these vaccines. And you know, and who's to blame, right? I mean, I think a lot
of people have been asking that. The vaccines have been delivered to the states. The vaccines
are sitting in fridges and freezers until those vaccines end up in arms. They're not doing
anyone any benefit. And sort of more directly your question, the hierarchy of who gets it when
keeps changing, right? So initially it was going to be the one a prime, we're going to do all the
ER the ICU, then we're going to get long term care facility and the rest of the health care
providers. And now a number of the states have just broken ranks and said, you know what,
we're just doing everyone over a certain age. And it seems like a number of other states are
falling into line. So it is really interesting. I was walking the dogs with my wife, and we're
talking about there's been all this focus on the ethics of equity. You know, there's 20% of the
vaccines that are being given and 80% sitting in freezers and fridges. The emphasis, all the
effort and the energy I think right now has to go to getting people vaccinated so that the line
moves. You know, it doesn't matter if you're, you know, 10th in line and the line is like moving one
person per hour. I'd rather be 100th in line at a move at a line that's moving, you know, 100 people
every 12 minutes. So I really have to say, this will be changing, right, that the CDC guidance on
who's at risk, who's at might be at increased risk and who gets vaccinated when and what the
states are doing. And here in the US, the state governors are the ones that are making the ultimate
decisions on who gets vaccinated when these things are going to keep changing. We hear in New York,
it may change again. Pretty soon everyone will be in phase one and it really will hopefully be a
question of just churning people through getting everyone vaccinated because there's lots and lots
of doses out there. I think a big challenge is getting them in people's arms. So everyone can
have access to the vaccines as soon as possible. Sarah and Tallahassee wants to know, is it safe
to vaccinate patients with long COVID long haulers or whatever they are calling us unfortunate souls
these days? Sarah, that's a great question. And in some sort of insight, because I've been watching
this for a while, because I have a lot of long COVID patients go ahead and use that terminology
for the moment keeps changing too. And you know, how have they done with other vaccines? So some
of them got another vaccines over the last say 10 months now. And done fine. I did have one patient
that got tetanus shot. They said, gosh, I felt like sort of a relapse there for a while and then
kind of moved forward. So, you know, I've been doing a lot of vaccinations recently. We just got
the COVID vaccine supply for the pro health doctors on Tuesday. So immediately we ran out and
basically by the end of the next day, 90% of those vaccines that had arrived were in people's arms.
And and I did over 80 myself. And I would talk to people as I was doing this. And some of these
individuals are are individuals that are long COVID or long haulers. And I basically would say,
you got to let me know I want feedback. I want to hear like now we vaccinated over a million people.
I want to start getting feedback from how did these individuals do they were they were not
studied. This was not part of any of the data that was discussed under the EUA reviews.
So, as I get this data, I'm very excited to to share this and let people know. But when they
ask, they say, should I get vaccinated? I say, my gosh, look at how how you did with COVID the first
time. Do you want to risk getting at a second time? And so I'm encouraging these individuals to get
vaccinated. And we'll see what what the impact is. But at least, you know, so far, right, we've
been doing a lot of health care providers here in the state so far haven't gotten any negative
feedback from the long haulers. But boy, if there there's issues, I want to hear. So let me know.
Our last letter for 2020 is from Sue Ellen, who Daniel may remember from
Twipp, Sue Ellen from Roswell, Georgia. I was talking to some friends yesterday discussing COVID
vaccines. One friend says she will not get it does not even get flu vaccine because she's immune
compromised. She has some hereditary disorder that caused her to have her spleen removed.
I have at least two other friends I know who are missing their spleens. Well, whether they
miss them or not, I can't say, but they have had them removed. My question is, what is the impact
of having no spleen with regard to both COVID and the vaccine? Sounds like one of those prisoners
dilemma type logic problems. If you don't have a spleen, I would think you're immune compromised,
which should make you more liable to get severe COVID. So that should mean you should get the
vaccine. But according to my French, you can't even get the flu vaccine because of her immune
compromised status. So she figures that COVID vaccine is not for her either. You must have
patients who have had their spleen's removed. So what is your recommendation with regard to the
vaccine? Yeah, this I have to say this is a very interesting email and the whole issue about not
having a spleen. I have to say we consider these individuals who have spleen to be at higher risk
of bad outcomes with infections, particularly with pathogens that it's a polysaccharide type
response. So we worry about encapsulated organisms. So we're about homophilus, influenza, pneumococcus,
and such. So actually, we usually are sticklers, I would say, for getting these individuals vaccinated.
So I'm not sure why she would be under the impression not. So I'm going to say,
if you have no spleen, there is a site, there's a CDC, a splenia vaccine site where it basically
goes through and it gives you a list of a dozen vaccines that are really critical. There's even
a American Society of Hematology statement position on what to do with the mRNA vaccines,
if you have no spleen, and we encourage and they encourage people without a spleen to get the mRNA
vaccine. There's some concern that maybe you will not have as robust a response, but it's only
theoretical. There's no downside. The only concern is maybe you will respond as well. But let's
think about what's the issue with the spleen. The spleen is an area where you can have a lot
of germanol centers, a lot of maturation of B cells, make a lot of really good antibodies.
There are germanol centers in other places. So I'm going to say that I would recommend
Sue Allen. Nice to get your remember you well from Twib. But I would recommend actually going
ahead and getting that vaccine. I would say this is an individual who is at more at risk and
would potentially get benefit. Well, that is our COVID-19 clinical update number 43 with Dr.
Daniel Griffin. Daniel, it has been a privilege to have you join Twib this past year. Thanks so
much and happy new year. Oh, thank you as well. It's been great. I love the opportunity to share
this information. I hope everyone else enjoys it. And look forward to more updates next year.
And I'll just I'll close on a little bit of good news. I just found out today that now with the
excitement of CT values, I can get CT values on Long Island as well as at Columbia. So
hopefully I'll have some clinical experience to share with everyone in the future.
