This week in virology, the podcast about viruses, the kind that make you sick.
From MicrobeTV, this is Twiv. This week in virology, episode 704, recorded on January 7th, 2021.
I'm Vincent Drackeniello, and you're listening to the podcast All About Viruses. Joining me today
from New York, Daniel Griffin. Hello, everyone. Clinical update, 44, the first for 2021, Daniel.
It is. It is. And I'm hoping that this is a better year. I was just going to say, Daniel,
is this going to be a better year? Yes, it will be. Well, let me put it this way.
Is it starting off in a better way? No, no, it is not. You know, it's sort of arbitrary,
right that, you know, 2020 ended on a specific date, but the pandemic doesn't respect that.
So yeah, I mean, so let me start with my quotation, and then we'll get right back to how bad things
are. And maybe when I, as I read this, people recognize it. I will respect the hard one,
hard one scientific gains of those physicians in whose steps I walk and gladly share such
knowledge as is mine with those who are to follow. I will apply for the benefit of the sick,
all measures that are required, avoiding those twin traps of overtreatment and therapeutic
nihilism. I will remember that there is art to medicine, as well as science, and that warmth,
sympathy, and understanding may outweigh the surgeon's knife or the chemist's drug.
I will not be ashamed to say, I know not, nor will I fail to call in my colleagues when the
skills of another are needed for a patient's recovery. I know what that is, and I'm not a doctor.
And what is that? It's a Hippocratic oath. It is. Now, this is the modern version, and this was
actually written in 1964 by Louis lasagna, the academic dean of the School of Medicine at Tuft.
So it's updated. If people ever go back and read the original, it's a little interesting.
It's not what we think of. So I wanted to throw that out there.
Your background has changed a bit. I see some viral flowers, right?
Yes. So this is actually a gift over, I guess, this shoulder, right? I'm backwards,
so this shoulder. Let's see if I can see the show typing.
Well, I'm trying to. But over my shoulder is a bouquet of pathogens.
Wow. And this was actually created by my wife's youngest sister, Genevieve.
And it's got there's the coronavirus that perhaps people recognize in there. There's HIV,
there's syphilis, there's tuberculosis. We've got hercinia pestis. This is a whole bunch in there.
I like it. I like it.
Yeah, people are always wondering how I put the books up there, but I think the books have
all fallen, right? They've all fallen off. It's a good thing. It's a good change for the new year,
Daniel. Yeah, they're all on the floor.
All right. So people probably know that things are tough.
And it's really hard for us to take care of patients and provide the same level of care
when numbers rise. The latest reports, I think people have probably heard, reminded me of a
conversation that actually was rich, rich. And Alan, we're reaching out with words of advice,
things to do. When we were running out of oxygen in New York, I don't know if people
remember that. And I know Northwell has been in the press negative stuff lately.
But one of the things that they did at some of our local hospitals is they really upgraded
the oxygen system. So we have a lot of oxygen supply capacity that we did not have a year ago.
And a lot of things that were happening a year ago, we were running out of oxygen. We were actually
wheeling in mobile tanks to some of the rooms to keep up with the demands. We actually got to
one point when we were discussing, we were going to reach out to the aviation industry,
out to the airports. What can we do to get more oxygen? So right now, at least in New York,
in some of the hospitals where I'm working, people thought ahead. And they actually, they put in
the money, they upgraded the oxygen. And we're able to keep a lot of people off of ventilators,
where we'll keep people's oxygen at a good level by doing a lot of high flow oxygen delivery
techniques that we couldn't do before. But this requires a lot of attention. I sort of mentioned
the art of medicine. There was a woman the other day, and the nurse was calling out,
I need a doctor. And I went in and it was an older woman. It's actually one of the other
infectious disease doctors, Dr. Fatima Johari was taking care of her and excellence. Nice to have
the help of such high quality colleagues. But this woman had had the BIPAPON, which is somewhat
suffocating. And she's an older woman and she's frightened and she feels ill and she's alone
because of the isolation of the COVID. And it really was a question of me sitting there,
holding her hand, getting her to take deep breaths, getting her to relax, getting her to
allow the oxygen to stay on. We still need to do that. These are human beings. You can't just
check off a box and walk out of the room and have systems and things take care of them. They
need people at the bedside. So as the numbers rise, not only how are you supposed to hold the hand
of a frightened woman with requiring oxygen and this claustrophobic feeling device
when you've got so many other people. And as we're seeing sort of the horrors of LA,
where they're telling the ambulances, conserve your oxygen. Because if the person requires too
much oxygen, let's sort of triage. Don't bring them here. It's really, I have to say, kind of,
well, it is very troubling just to say that. Numbers are bad here. One of the things that I
point out, one thing that really was devastating in the first wave here in New York, about 50% of
the deaths, about half of the people coming into the hospitals were coming in from nursing homes
from group homes. We published on this. A lot of people have really, how do you keep those people
safe? A lot of them died during the first wave. We're not really seeing those in the first wave.
We had about say about 80 when we maxed out 80 community dwelling people with COVID. We're now
up to about 90 or 100 community dwelling at one of the hospitals where I was actually this morning.
So we're seeing more of the community, but we're not seeing those nursing home
individuals. We're starting to get vaccinated or keep them safe. There's testing other measures.
We're not sending infected infectious people into those settings. So, yeah, I think we, well,
we're going to probably pass 4,000 deaths per day this month, but we were pretty darn close
yesterday. We'll see what the numbers are today. So things are not going well.
Now, why did I start off with the Hippocratic oath? It's because I wanted to sort of bring us
back to I think the paradigms I talked about, the evidence, the vehemence, the eloquence,
the diffidence, the nervousness, and then the evidence-based medicine. But I also want to
throw a second thing in that I think people will maybe sort of think about and maybe they started
to already get this flavor as I talk. There's actually two splits that I'm going to say in practice
style. One is derived from Hippocratic philosophy, but as you'll, as you may have noticed, it was
not in the oath. And this is the first do no harm, the premium known nocere. And that's really this
idea of don't do something unless you know it's going to make a difference. And there's a second
style that I want to be respectful of, which is if we think something can help, let's go ahead and
try it. Now, I'll say in calmer times, the less is more that do not treat your patients with
untested therapeutics has been more of a common approach. It's definitely been more of the academic
approach. This is the philosophy behind having an FDA restricting the use of prescription medications
to highly trained licensed professionals. You certainly wouldn't take anything off the bench,
no concoction, no nothing that you think would work and then put it into a patient without doing
safety and other trials. But there's a gray area, a lot of the medicines that we use, we've been
using for many, many years, but never really actually doing those randomized control trials
that we sort of have required or said are the gold standard. And I clearly, right, I clearly am,
you know, of the school where I respect the randomized control trials. But I just wanted to
point out there's there's two different styles here. I learned from actually watching both
styles. There certainly are a lot of individuals that try things at the bedside and I watched that
and learned from it. And sometimes this actually leads to us going ahead and doing those randomized
control trials. So all right, just wanted to throw that out as we started, because we have some we
have some new information. And I'm going to jump into the lot of vaccination arms here.
So one thing I want to talk about is passive vaccination. And what are the two types of
passive vaccination that we know about? Well, I'm going to get to monoclonal antibodies,
but we had a study out of Argentina funded by the Gates Foundation, early high titer plasma
therapy to prevent severe COVID-19 in older adults. This was just published in the New England Journal
of Medicine. And I want to say this, this was done the way I think going back to March, April,
convalescent plasma should have been studied. What they did is they actually,
they took convalescent plasma, they identified convalescent plasma that had high titer neutralizing
antibodies, and they gave it early. They gave it within the first 72 hours. So this was a randomized
double blind placebo control trial of convalescent plasma with high IgG tighters neutralizing
antibodies against severe acute respiratory syndrome, coronavirus two, SARS-CoV-2, in older
adults given within 72 hours of the onset of COVID-19 symptoms. So they're still in that first week,
they're in that critical viral replication window. 160 patients underwent randomization.
A severe disease developed 16%. People that convalescent plasma, 31% in people that got placebo.
So a relative risk reduction, basically about by half, about 50%. And they didn't see any
significant adverse events, which makes sense. You're giving this to healthy outpatient people
that have not gone into the second, the inflammatory phase. So I think this finally builds on trends
that we saw on a lot of other trials. The idea that high tighters neutralizing antibodies given
in the appropriate window, not giving it late, all the issues that we saw there. So hopefully,
this is going to guide people who are looking at using convalescent plasma. And many parts of
the world, the monoclonal's I'm about to talk about, may not be available. We talk about convalescent
plasma being a resource intensive therapy, but it's not quite as expensive as the monoclonal
antibodies. So let's go into the next, the next passive vaccination area. And I have some, I'll say
really, I think, positive developments here. So bam, linibomav, that's really the monoclonal
antibody that we're being used the most. That's the Eli Lilly product, the Regeneron product,
also has EUA, doesn't quite got as much attention. But the Mayo Clinic, which is treated over 2000
patients, and Houston Methodist, which is treated over 1000, they're doing about 70 patients a day
there, they shared their experience, right? So a lot of clinicians were concerned about monoclonals
got EUA with just looking at 100, 200 folks, a little over 200 folks in those, each of those trials.
And so people were saying, you know, how can you, how can you really go ahead and make this
standard of care without more experience? So now we've had thousands of people, a post EUA
experience, not in a formal trial. And here the reports were very similar safety profile,
actually went over this with the people at Eli Lilly about a week ago. And that's what
we're seeing at the Mayo in Houston, and about a 70% reduction in people progressing to require
any hospital level care, any oxygen, any ER visits. So I look at this, I say, this is pretty impressive.
Here is a therapy, you know, steroids, what 2% mortality benefit. Here's a therapy that if you
give this to people in the first week of illness, sort of earlier, the better, a 75% reduction in
those people going on to require any medical care, keeping these people out of the hospital.
And the Mayo people actually suggested that they were starting to see evidence of decreased
mortality, and actually suggesting that will this will eventually lead to a peer reviewed
publication. So I think that's exciting. And I'll sort of throw in here, you know,
the issue that we've seen across the board, it's just like the vaccines, only 20, 30% of the doses
are getting to people, the rest of them are sitting there. We just opened up our United in
research. So I'm going to be doing a it actually be a trial. So 7,500 individuals will get BAM
linibimab, and we'll actually get more data. So really understand the timing, the safety profile,
and the efficacy of these therapeutics. So find out, you know, and look into this more and make
sure that this is something that if you feel like it's appropriate for your patients, you know how
to access the programs. All right, the early inflammatory phase, right? I've sort of skipped
right over the vaccines, but let me let me throw it in here before we get there. I mean, the whole
idea, right, is to keep people from even getting to this point. And the vaccine rollout has been
incredibly frustrating. I think that people have heard about this. You know, only 20 to 30% of
the vaccines that have been distributed have gotten in people's arms. It's having a conversation
with today about, you know, the latest sort of, I guess, instead of asking how can we help, it's,
we will punish you if you don't do a better job. I'm not sure that's helpful. We shared some of
the experience about when pro health received the vaccines, how basically by the end of the next
day, 90% of those were in people's arms. But I have to say, this was not easy. We were told that
eventually we were getting vaccines. The vaccines arrived. That's how I knew they were coming. No
one picked up a phone the day before to say they're in the mail. They'll be there tomorrow. They're
being shipped. I mean, I'm sure that will occurred. But it was really it was Tuesday, 1200 vaccines
just showed up. And then we were basically trying to get those in arms. You know, it was the week
after Christmas. A lot of people are on vacation. It's a challenge. You know, I think we need to
do a better job. We've really cut the departments of health out of the equation here. And this is
what they do. They were ready. They were ramped up and ready to go. So we need to do a better job
there. I'm just going to sort of leave that. But you know, if people are listening, you know,
we we all want to do a better job. The hospitals are not, you know, failing to vaccinate on purpose.
You know, instead of governors reaching out and saying we're going to find you, why don't they
reach out and say, how can we help make this happen? Are there HIPAA issues? Is there red tape in the
way? Are there, do you need, you know, issues you need help getting, you know, IT stuff uploaded?
What do you need? Let's make it happen. Because I'm sure there's some IT workers and other folks
out there who are ready to help just. So I'm sort of my request changed the paradigm if you can.
And maybe all our listeners can help push that forward. The early inflammatory phase,
I mentioned before, we're running out of oxygen. What do we have? Well, we do have remdesivir.
And a little subtle change here. I don't think any of us have gotten more and more excited about
efficacy. But there have been several studies now saying like you don't really have to worry
about renal function. This is being given to people with end stage real disease, people on
dialysis. It looks like it's safe in people with renal disease. It looks like it's tolerated in
people that have pretty significant LFT abnormalities up to 10 times upper limit of normal.
So at this point, I'm not saying we have any more efficacy data. I'm just saying that we can we
no longer have to not give it if there's a renal function issue or LFT issues. The other, and you
know, I'm going to tell people they should listen to a TWIB 703 Vincent. Because I think you did a
great job. The group did a great job. I was going to spend a little time talking about CT values,
and I'm just going to talk a little bit about CT values. Not all our hospitals, as I mentioned,
have access to this. Some of the machines don't give CT values. They just you know, you could
save a little money and buy a yes or no machine. But there were some interesting studies that
came out that were talked about. And one of the things is that someone comes in and timing again
matters. We're not looking at peak level of virus. We're saying seven days out, we're saying the time
at which someone de-compensates and someone shows up at the hospital if the people have a very high
level of virus at that point. And they have yet to mount an antibody response when they're sick
enough to require hospitalization. Those people are much more likely to die. And we're looking at
a patient today in the ICU who I do not expect to survive. You know, who came in with the PCR
positive. You know, it was into the second week, antibodies had not developed yet. These are people
that are not doing well. How does that help us clinically? I don't know if it does. I mean,
some of the things we've seen is that people that are going to do poorly tend to de-compensate
earlier. So some of my discussions were, well, it makes sense. The virus is still high because
they're coming in earlier. You come in at day 14. I expect a lower viral level. I also expect
there to be enough time for the antibodies to develop. So we'll learn more about that. But
this is potentially now that we're talking about CT values, something that's going to help us
on the tail end. You know, I do a lot of consulting enough. People know about this for the entertainment
industry and sports. And I had always been a zero tolerance. But now with CT values, we actually
had a discussion that if that if both CT values, right, because there's often two primers, that's
if both CT values are greater than 34, and the person has been well for more than, we'll say,
20 days to be conservative. I really think that that may actually be reasonable for us to start
looking at, well, at least for me to start loosening up my zero tolerance for some of those settings.
Secondary infection phase, you know, there was a there was a morning conference,
Tuesday morning conference at Columbia. And first, it was the pulmonologist. Then it was the
infectious disease physicians. And they were doing some case reports. And it was a discussion
about invasive pulmonary infections. So aspergillosis, that's one of our molds that we worry about.
And it's interesting. I've seen several studies and I always hate when they throw in, you know,
the word the judgmental word low or high. And there was a recent publication occurrence of
invasive pulmonary fungal infections in severe COVID-19 patients admitted to the ICU. And they
said we have seen very few only 4.8% of our patients have a fungal infection. Well, one in 20, I'm not
sure I would say very few other series have suggested higher. We have not seen that many in
the hospitals where I have worked, we have seen some. But this just when you're in that secondary
infection phase, just not only we worried about bacterial infections, not only we've seen more
and more multi drug resistant bacterial infections. So you put them on what we thought was broad
spectrum antibiotics. And actually it's ineffective because of the rising rates from the antibiotic
overuse. But you also have to be thinking about fungal infections as well. So discussion about
sending off the fun to tell the Aspergillus galactamanin serum test as well as BAL
specimens to try to sort all this out. Got a very interesting call today, which hopefully I'll get
more development on going forward, but an individual at one of our local hospitals,
who sounds like he is being admitted with a multi system inflammatory syndrome in an adult
gentleman in his late 30s. I'm also concerned that this person may actually have a stronger
ladies hyper infection as well. So we'll get some interesting things there. But that's just
something that we see often people leave the hospital, and then they come back in week three
or four with just, you know, sky high ferritins, D dimers, massive amounts of inflammation.
And the challenge to sort out is this someone that you treat with IVIG and steroids,
or is this someone who has a massive infection? So there's sort of this overlap here. You want
to try to somehow make a really tough decision here. And we're working with the CDC and the
physicians there. So hopefully that'll end up with a positive outcome in this young gentleman.
The other thing that I want to close on is to talk about long COVID. And I make sure I always
talk about this. I've been doing that since I think about April. And there was a there was
a recent study cognitive deficits in people who have recovered from COVID-19 relative to controls.
And this looked at over 84,000 individuals. So what I really enjoyed about this is the fact that
you were able to see that the severity of disease was predictive of the severity of the cognitive
deficits, people who were sick enough that they ended up on a ventilator. The cognitive impact
in them was basically equivalent of about being 10 years older, having an IQ drop of about 8.5.
But on specific testing, you were seeing cognitive deficits, even in people that had mild
outpatient disease, not quite as severe. So the severity of your disease, whether or not you have
significant respiratory symptoms early on, significant amount of oxygen support, whether or not you're
ventilated. So the sicker you are, not only the higher likelihood you have of getting long-term
cognitive deficits, but also predictive of more severe cognitive deficits, a little more data on
the loss of taste and smell. We're actually seeing about 86% of people by six months are
getting their taste and smell back. That means about 14, 15% of people six months out still are
chewing on cardboard. So we'll end it there. I want to try to keep it a little short today.
And ask you to continue to come to parasites without borders and help us support the P-score,
their HIV and AIDS programs. I just want to point out, we're immersed in COVID, we're drowning in
COVID, but when we come out the other side of this, we have so many other issues and we're hoping to
be here to help educate and support all these other causes. All right, Dan, three quick questions.
One is from Dr. O'Brien who writes about your update on the use of Bambam. In the first week to
lower the incidence of hospitalization, when I reached out to our local hospital officials,
they seem to be limiting this treatment to very high-risk patients. Could you give us further
information about the specific criteria for emergency use of this drug? My staff members seem
quite sick at home, but do not meet the criteria set forth by the hospital. It seems to me that
Bambam might be beneficial in a much wider group of patients sick with COVID-19.
Yeah, so I shared this. This is like the vaccines. We've made it so hard to access things that no
one gets them, so they sit there on the shelf. Some of the hospitals, I'll say in Minnesota,
for instance, the experience I had there was that they're basically trying to give out as much
per day as is coming in, so it's not just sitting there. So they will first target the people that
are highest-risk, so that would be people who have a 10% or higher likelihood of ending up in the
hospital. So this would be individuals who are 65 and older, 55 plus a certain list of comorbidities.
There is a Bambalinibimab FDA-FACT sheet, which is available online to look at. I glance at it,
because the third category is very complicated. It's any of the following, and it's a long list
of severe diseases, which significantly increase your chance of ending up in the hospital.
So they go through that triage. I think it makes sense. I mean, this is a therapy that
the reason it has E-way for the 10% or higher risk of hospitalization is that's where it makes
sense. But it would seem to me, rather than letting it sit on the shelf, it is probably
beneficial in people beyond that group. And I've actually seen people outside of that group get
it very quickly bounce back quicker than we would expect with the natural history.
But then again, you know, as I started off with my evidence-based medicine,
that population was not specifically studied. So you're stretching it a little bit,
but it tends to be a very safe therapy. As we move forward with more studies,
hopefully the use of this will expand. All right. The next email is from
Allen, who writes about his wife who has severe asthma. And some years ago, in preparation for
a chest x-ray, she was given intravenous iodine contrast, and she went into anaphylactic shock.
And they had no idea that she was allergic to this contrast agent. So he asks, how are we
supposed to know if we were allergic to any of the ingredients in the vaccine? If there are a
bunch of compounds that we have no clue about, more specifically, are any also found in iodine
contrast? Yeah. So this is an excellent question. When the MMWR just came out with a recent
report on the side effects seen with the vaccines and reported about 1 in 100,000 people are having
an anaphylactic reaction. So that means 11.1 people and the first million that got vaccines.
These people were treated with beta drill, some of them received epinephrine, and then all recovered.
So this is not a vaccine that has zero risks. It is an effective agent. So there is this.
But who had those reactions? The initial recommendation, the current recommendation is someone who's had
a prior significant vaccine reaction, and that would be an anaphylactic reaction to a vaccine.
Someone you'd have heightened concerned about. It's not a food allergy. It's not an iodine
allergy. I'm doing a talk for an allergy group next week. There is a paper that came out that was
actually published by a group out of Harvard looking at PEG 2000, polyethylene glycol. The idea is
that maybe what is triggering these immune reactions, these anaphylactic reactions, and there is some
investigation into trying to figure out if there's some way to do maybe skin testing to figure out
who that 1 in 100,000 person is. I have to say the way I weigh in on this is the recommendation
is all the sites giving vaccine vaccinations should have a vaccination reaction kit,
which involves beta drill. The epinephrine, which was to have enough for three people
at each site, also intravenous formulations of the anhistamine as well as the oral and
femotidine, so intravenous other, sort of H2 blockers, and the ability basically to get
someone to a higher level of care as needed. We're talking about a million people vaccinated
10 reactions. It's actually quite uncommon, but you need to be ready for those because again,
if you have this reaction, you have this reaction. Our last question is from Laura who writes about
her 66-year-old mother who was recently updating her advanced medical directive and included a
note saying if she were to contract COVID-19, she does not want to be placed on a ventilator,
as she believes she would be unlikely to survive and regain the ability to live a full
independent life. I did a quick search to see if I could find any literature on long-term
outcomes for COVID-19 patients on ventilators and have found one study considering whether
patients would survive to discharge but no other endpoints. I'd appreciate your insights on longer-term
outcomes for ventilated patients, either from the literature or if research on the subject has not
been published, your impressions from your own patient population. Yeah, so our own patient
experiences were actually published. Early on, you saw data out of New York Presbyterian, so
Columbia, you saw data out of NYU, you saw data experienced at Northwell, so the different hospitals
where I see patients. The initial experience was that people who ended up on the ventilator,
the early experience was the last single-digit survival that they got up to 15% survival,
but consistently people who went up on ventilators have a very poor prognosis. They have a limited
chance of surviving, so it continues to be as much as possible to try to keep people off the
ventilators. Our experience, which I think is consistent with the literature, is once you get
on the ventilator, you're probably not going to survive. I say probably, but again, each individual
case, so people make these advanced directives, but you want to look at the whole picture. What's
the age in the individual? What are the comorbidities? Now we've talked a little bit about the ability
to look at viral levels and antibodies and inflammatory markers and neutrophil lymphocyte ratios,
so you can even make this more customized to an individual. That's potentially another way
to nuance it to look and talk to your mom's health care provider about specifically for her,
which is really what it is. At this age, maybe this is one of the people that would survive and
come off the ventilator, so you want to have those discussions to make sure that, as we say,
your goals of care are consistent with the treatments. Daniel, if you do survive after a ventilator,
do you have any long-term issues? In most cases, I think we're seeing yes. As I discussed today,
high incidence of about a 10-point IQ hit on average, you're seeing long-term disability.
People who survive, and I think this is really important for pillage matter,
just surviving COVID doesn't mean you bounce back to 100%. A lot of times, it means now you're going
to have significant mortality. That's COVID-19, clinical update number 44 with Dr. Daniel Griffin.
Thanks, Daniel. Oh, thank you so much. Thank you, everyone. If you can push,
help us get those vaccines into arms. Thank you so much.
