This week in virology, the podcast about viruses, the kind that make you sick.
From Microbe TV, this is Twiv, this week in virology episode 707 recorded on January 14, 2021.
I'm Vincent Rackeniello, and you're listening to the podcast all about viruses. Joining me today
from New York, Daniel Griffin. Hello, everyone. How's it going, Daniel?
Poorly. Poorly is the word, not well on many fronts, but let's get into the weeds.
Start with my quotation. For the world, it is drowning in paper.
I want people to think for just a second, when would someone have made that comment? When would
they have said for the world it is drowning in paper? This is said by Poirot, an Agatha Christie
character in the story, in the book Murder in Mesopotamia, which was written in 1936.
100 years ago, they thought they were drowning in paper. What do we think is happening now?
As we go forward, people will understand why maybe we should call this episode drowning in paper.
On January 8, we saw 307,983 as the daily case count for the U.S. COVID cases.
January 12, we saw 4,447 deaths. People should realize there's a delay. When you see 307,
almost 308,000 cases, two or three weeks later, we're not going to be sitting in only 4,000 deaths.
We're going to be up above 5,000. It's predicting the future based upon what we know.
We really need to start getting this different. A lot of the hospitals, I get regular alerts
every morning. How close are we to that critical census where they can no longer do elective
surgeries. They have to switch over to full crisis pandemic mode. Actually, we're starting
to see hospitals in our area. Basically, reach that. First one just reached it earlier this week.
Another hospital is just a few admissions away from being at that level. For the hospitals,
this is really difficult. This is how they actually keep the doors open, how they keep the finances
out of the red. For a lot of individuals, this is necessary care.
It's a really difficult situation. We're in here. Let's talk a little bit about vaccines.
Can you imagine the topic, the interest, the questions are now flooding in about vaccinations.
I'm going to try to talk about a few things. One of the big things I think I can bring to the
conversation is what's it like on the ground? What are we actually seeing? Not what's being
published, not what's being talked about, but what are we actually seeing? One of the big
conversations when we were looking at how are we physically going to do this was the question of
how will vaccinations impact testing? As mentioned, we have more COVID right now
than we ever had in this country. Testing still is critical. Testing saves lives.
If we stop testing, we miss an opportunity to pull those people out to prevent them from spreading
to others. We also miss an opportunity to diagnose them earlier. Testing is critical.
As we've had a lot of conversations, I'm going to talk about some of those conversations,
there seems to at least be a consensus among the people I've talked to that we need to be really
careful that vaccinations don't cannibalize our testing capacity. Two rules. One is new
and one is one we've held to for a while. One is the vaccination rule, which is never miss an
opportunity to vaccinate. This comes from our pediatrician colleagues. Kids come in,
they've got a little bit of a runny nose. Some providers say, oh, why don't we just wait until
the kid is completely healthy. The child is completely healthy. We're not treating goats here.
If you wait for that child to be completely healthy, you may be waiting a long time,
and then they may come in quite ill with a vaccine preventable illness. One of the mantras in
pediatrics is never miss an opportunity to vaccinate. Every point of care is an opportunity,
and a very similar new rule, which is never miss an opportunity to test. Every time someone
comes has an interaction with a healthcare provider, this is an opportunity to test, to find out if
they're positive and move forward. I'm going to talk a little bit about how this relates to
vaccinations and some of the troubling experiences I've had recently about people getting vaccinated
and then finding out that they're positive. Let me just relate a couple stories. I've talked a
little bit about this, but now I'm seeing it more. Early on, what I was seeing was the
healthcare professionals. They should know better, right? They got their vaccine in some of them in
mid-December, maybe towards the end of December, and then Christmas Day, New Year's Eve or New
Year's Day, exposures a few days later end up sick with COVID. We're certainly seeing people
get vaccinated and then shortly after before they get to that second dose, that 14 days when they
have that protection, getting vaccinated. A lot of this is education, and I know my large audience
is the optimum tri-state, the pro-health care physicians that listen. Really important,
I know that we're trying to get people vaccinated. It's trying to be sort of a throughput there,
but you want to make sure you reinforce because even healthcare providers got the questions
a couple yesterday. I got my vaccine three days later. I went to a restaurant. It was supposed to
be outdoor dining, but then it got cold and the tent sides came down. I realized I was indoors,
and my quick response was, obviously, you got up and left. No, they stayed and had dinner and
wanted to know if there was any protection three days after their vaccine. So big, big to reinforce
here is that we think you're starting to get some protection 10 or 14 days after the first
vaccination. Some of this stuff we're hearing the experience in Israel is a reduction of about
50%. But that doesn't mean 50-50 you're protected. That means we're seeing 50% less infections
with the same exposure. So maybe you do 30 minutes instead of 15 to get infected. We're not really
seeing that protection that we talk about until you are two weeks after the second dose of your
vaccine. And then the protection actually is quite robust, quite impressive. Let's talk about
some new sort of new vaccine results, the interim results of phase one dash two a trial of add 26
COVID-19 vaccine. This was published on the 13th in the New England Journal of Medicine. So Wednesday,
I think our episode is going to drop this Saturday, so the 16th maybe. Now we had this
information from an earlier press release, but now it came out the New England Journal. So we
have the peer reviewed journal. It's interesting. I feel like the media is treating this like
brand new news, which is interesting. But this is a peer reviewed presentation of the Johnson and
Johnson Multi-Center placebo-controlled phase one slash two trial. Looking at a little over 400,
402 randomly assigned healthy adults to receive either a single dose or a two dose schedule
of the Johnson and Johnson ad no vector vaccine. There are three cohorts. We'll talk about cohort
one. These were adults ages 18 to 55 cohort three adults 65 and older. Don't worry, we'll get to
three longer term data looking at single dose and two dose regimen and the two dose regimen
was collected in cohort two. But this is really just looking at cohort one and three, just to let
you know. What were the results that we saw published in the New England Journal? As far as
neutralizing antibody titers, they were detected in 90% or more of all the participants on day 29
after the first vaccine dose and reached 100% by day 57. That's sort of interesting, right? The
titers continuing to rise. This is not quote unquote unique for this vaccine. Other other
vaccines we have out there, you have a continued rise. But just sort of put this, I guess I'll put
it in context of a Moderna. You get your first dose 28 days later, you're getting your second
dose 14 days later. So that puts us at about day 42 compared here to day 57 to get to that level
of protection. So it takes a little bit longer. So the second dose, and I think this is an interesting
issue. This is a vaccine that is looking at coming out as a single dose. The limited data
they talked about in this paper was that a second dose increased the antibody titer by a factor of
about 2.6 to 2.9. Another thing that was interesting in this paper, people are always asking me,
hey, is there an assay for neutralizing antibody responses in this New England Journal article?
The spike binding antibody response or your total antibody actually correlated with neutralizing
antibody. So you don't need that special test. There is a commercially available neutralizing
antibody assay, but you can at least based on this data, just use a normal antibody assay.
They also report CD4 T cell responses. We care about that. Already by day 14, you were showing
you were seeing clear skewing toward the type 1 helper T cells. There was a nice robust CD8 T cell
response. No safety flags, I have to say. There was just the usual fatigue, headache,
myalgia, infection, site pain. Some of the other communications Johnson Johnson has talked about
the fact that this is a platform they've already looked at in over 100,000 people.
So this is reassuring. We expect the phase 3 trial data to come out on Johnson and Johnson
before the end of January. So expect an update on that when it's available probably about two
weeks from now. They are suggesting Johnson and Johnson is suggesting that they will have EUA,
request EUA approval February. This is, I think, the most exciting little tale I'll
set on here. As per their agreement, Operation Worsfie with the US government, by January 1st,
they will deliver 100 million vaccine doses to the US. So this is a huge shot in the arm,
so to speak, as far as vaccine doses being available. A little bit about what we're seeing
on the ground as far as the Pfizer and the Moderna. We are seeing, I think, consistent with the studies
that we are seeing reactogenicity around the first doses. And we are seeing more significant
reactogenicity after the second dose. So a person gets a low-grade temperature elevation,
they feel kind of crummy and tired after the first dose. They may feel a little more crummy,
a little more tired after the second dose. Very few of my colleagues missed work after the first
dose. Several of my colleagues missed work after the second dose. So that's just sort of something
for people to be keeping in mind as far as the timing on when they get their vaccine relative to
what important things they might have to do. And there are a couple interesting things about
this vaccine, right? So we've talked about the fact about 1 in 100,000 are having anaphylactic
reactions, right? Nobody's died. This is something that we can treat and address.
It's required that all the vaccine administration sites have the appropriate therapeutics and
personnel to deal with this. So Benadryl, an EpiPen, IV, from Odedine, steroids, things like that.
An interesting thing that we've been seeing in the Moderna is what I have, I was searching for a name
and I'm going to now call it the seven-day itch. And I think if you listen to the prior
twiv and you can get a sense of how the immune response works, first you have more visceral
terminal center development. And that right about day seven is when you get the local
terminal center production. So about day seven, in a minority of people, we're seeing that the
injection site becomes itchy, erased. There is actually a visible redness in the area.
Got some pictures people keep sending me. Take Benadryl, go to sleep, usually resolves pretty
quickly. And occasionally, if you really check, you can notice that the lymph nodes in the area
are a little bit swollen. And this is all evidence that you're getting that immune response that we
really want. What about eligibility? It has expanded. And this expanded really quickly.
On Monday, it was down to individual 75 and older. And I think a couple hours later, it was
individual 65 and older. And this whole phase one B group, at least in New York, from DC from
the White House, there's been encouragement to across the board really expand access
in response to the fact that way too many doses are sitting in freezer. So now expanded in many
areas to 65 and older, first responders, all the support staff for first responders, you know,
fire, police, investigators, public safety, any sworn civil personnel, anyone involved in corrections,
anyone involved in schools, I think it's anyone who walks close to a school at this point,
anyone who's licensed, registered or involved with child care, people in public transport,
folks in homeless shelters or working there. So they're really, you know, public facing grocery
store workers in person college instructors. I don't know if that counts you, Vincent.
They're also talking about expanding it to high risk medical conditions, people with
high risk medical conditions. The actual details about what those are are unclear. But there's
really a move. And there was a, I'm going to say it was a nice article in Teen Vogue by Priyanka
Bonsell called botching the COVID-19 vaccine rollout in New York. And it was all about trying to
move from this, this sort of threatening, you know, incarceration, carceral type model of we're
going to find you if you have issues to let's really figure out how to get those vaccines into
people's arms and hopefully a more cooperative. What can we do to get it there? And what are
the issues? Like what is happening? What is failing on the ground? So the first is an issue of trust,
right? In December, the Moderna Pfizer companies had promised and actually delivered on this that
they would produce 20 million doses. January, that would go up to 40 million, February,
or up to 80 million. So really going to really going to increase over time. So what happened
with those 20 million doses in December? Well, the first thing is the government held back 10
million, right? So they'd have enough for that second supply should suddenly the skyfall Pfizer
Moderna fail to deliver. So they only sent out 10 million. Once those 10 million ended up mostly
at acute care hospitals, the hospital said, well, we don't trust the government's going to send us
that next shipment. So we're going to take 10 million, we're going to take five million and put
them in the freezer. And then there were only five million vaccines in play. And then they're
trying to in acute care hospitals somehow figure out how to vaccinate, you know, the acute care,
the phase one a prime hospital based ICU, ER, you know, clinicians and staff. There wasn't great
communication. Basically, the vaccines would just show up and suddenly had these vaccines on hand
and you're trying to figure out what to do with them. So there really was a lot of issues here.
A couple things have happened. And I just want to point that this is true. When you see, you know,
Oh, this hospital has has either administered or allocated 62% of their vaccines. They're
counting it twice, right? They give one shot, they say, Oh, we've given one shot, but we've
allocated the other. So you're counting twice that other shot is sitting in the freezer. So a we
did 30, you know, we did 32%. But we're going to count it as 64. That's that's what we're seeing.
There's now been a push from on high. Instead of sitting on half of those vaccines,
all the vaccines are going to start flowing. Pfizer and Moderna are basically saying we can do this.
We're producing these vaccines. And we want to get those into people's arms. There is also,
I got to say, very frustrating on the ground. There's a lot of paperwork. There's more paperwork,
and it takes more time to do the paperwork and the electronic uploading than it takes to do the
vaccine. And I'm just going to provide sort of a personal story. My mom on Monday, she is in her
80s. She went to go get the vaccine. And so, you know, it was a Herculean effort. My mother has
some health issues at the moment. So my wife had to help her. Another individual had to help her.
A big thing getting her out, getting her in a car, getting her to the vaccine site. She got to
the vaccine site. She needed to be helped to finally get to the area where she could get the
vaccine. And they show her the information. And she says, Oh, my, actually, my wife picked up on this.
It has your birthday as 1931. They have your birth date off. So she tells the lady and
laces, Oh, my gosh, we can't vaccinate you. You stay here goes off to find a manager comes back
about 15 minutes later. The entire, you know, the line, the production has stopped. And then they
come up the solution that they're going to put a line through the one put in the correct digit.
My mother will initial it. Now they will vaccinate her. So, you know, we really need
basically a loosening up one of our a couple of our sites. You know, I think I've described
the pro health experience and had issues uploading the HL seven file to the New York state information
immunization system. Their response was, of course, instead of, Hey, we're going to send an IT person.
Let's figure out how to make this happen was we're not sending you any more vaccines until you
fix your IT issue at that site really kind of back to the the team boa article. We need much more
of a cooperative, transparent model. We don't need to worry about HIPAA and paperwork and electronic
uploads. We need to get those vaccines and arms. And I have to say, down here on the ground,
those vaccines are sitting in freezers. There are thousands of vaccines sitting in freezers
here. And there's a lot of organizations that are ready to get those vaccines and arms. We need
to basically hear at sort of a low level need some help there. What about AstraZeneca? People
are asking about that. Why are we not giving this life saving AstraZeneca out there? And I think
I've talked about this a little bit before. AstraZeneca and the FDA have had some challenges. We don't
have the safety. We don't have the efficacy data that the FDA would like to see. And AstraZeneca
has not been as transparent and cooperative as the US FDA would like. And just to point out,
the issue right now is not a shortage of vaccines. It's an issue getting the vaccines we have into
arms. We expect there to be a lot more vaccines to be flowing in the next few months. What about
mutations and variants of interest? And I can't see Vince's face when I say that, but I can just
imagine it. Some interesting issues I'm going to talk about when we get to passive vaccination
there. But this is sort of a growing concern. What is going on here? Do we have surveillance
systems in place that are going to tell us that something is happening? And I think the UK was
doing quite a bit of sequencing. South Africa is doing quite a bit of sequencing. There's a call
to do more sequencing here in the United States, more surveillance so that if there is a change in
the genetic code that results in a change in the amino acid sequence, that results in something
that can affect the biology of the virus. We need to know about it. And I think there's also a
growing appreciation that we maybe were a little bit relaxed in thinking that coronaviruses
didn't change very much. But there's some interesting data now suggesting that
actually over time, coronaviruses can actually change, can adjust their biology. Few vaccine
FAQs, this sort of hit here before we move forward. The big one I get all the time is,
when can I stop wearing my mask? I get vaccinated. Can I stop wearing my mask? And there's a science
and there's a moral aspect to this. And I was giving a talk for the large pro-health
pediatric group a couple of nights ago. I guess it was Tuesday night. And Jay Berger asked this
question and a very pointed question. Dan, once I have my vaccine and you have your vaccine,
and one of our friends has their vaccine, and it's been a couple of weeks, can the three of us
sit in a room together, have a drink, take off those masks? Can we do this in public? Can we do
this when we go to a party, for instance? Well, here's the thing to say. If you've been vaccinated,
it is offering new protection. But there's only preliminary evidence that is decreasing the amount
of virus that you might spread to other people. So getting vaccinated does not mean that you will
not get virus and that you will not potentially spread it to others. The other side of this,
I'll say sort of the moral issue is let's say it's next September, and everyone who wants vaccine
has gotten their vaccine and had that time to develop immunity. And the only people out there
not getting vaccines are people who have decided not to get vaccines. Do the people who've gotten
vaccines? Are they required? Should they still have to wear a mask to protect people who've decided
not to get vaccinated? Now, as a physician in the healthcare setting, I think that we'll have to
continue to wear masks. But if you go to that party, that's much more of a moral decision.
Can I stop getting tested? This relates right to the first one. If you get vaccinated,
it really comes down to the question of what is the point of that test. A lot of settings
require people to get tested on a regular basis. And in those settings, they're actually a lot
more concerned about you getting the virus and spreading it to others. So if you're
working at a long-term care facility, if you're working with patients, if you're working in a
setting where you might expose people who either have not been vaccinated, or I'm going to add
to this group, people who have an issue with mounting an effective response and are still
vulnerable, then the mask wearing continues. How long after an infection can I get the vaccine?
Now, this comes up a lot. Someone gets the infection. It's been about three weeks. They're
feeling better. Can I get the vaccine or do I have to wait three months? The three months
was thrown out for monoclonal antibodies. It was thrown out for a deprioritization when it was
really sort of limited supplies. But we're recommending that if you have access to get
vaccinated, if your ticket comes up, you do not need to wait the three months. You can wait the
three months because we've learned that you're at very low risk of being reinfected in those
three months. Recent study in the UK, maybe I'll get to it, out to six months, about 86%, or 83%
less likely to get infected. So now we've moved not into, do people get reinfected,
but over what course of time, what percent reduction in likelihood of being reinfected do you get?
I always want to make sure I talk about my BAM-Lanny V-Map, BAM-BAM, BAM-Liniva-Map.
I'm just breaking that down into what is the crazy notation. And this is a MAB at the end,
monoclonal antibody, different from an IB inhibitor. I still remember that this week in
parasitism where Vincent and I confused an IB with an AB, very upsetting to me, but we'll move
forward. A couple of things we're seeing here, and this relates back to the variants. There is
some concern with a monoclonal, whether it be a single monoclonal or two monoclonals in a cocktail,
that you are only targeting one or two of what we think are 20 different epitopes, targets on the
spike protein. So this becomes much more of an issue. Will my monoclonal antibodies still work
when there's a change in the genetic code, when there's a change in the spike protein?
I can give you a little bit of data. I will say that Eli Lilly is actively looking at this.
Regeneron with their cocktail is looking at this, the B117, we won't call it the UK variant,
looks like it is not an issue. There might be an issue with one of the epitopes with the
South African variant, but this is the whole concept that we have not just one monoclonal targeting
one site, but we have the ability to use cocktail therapy. This is also really important from a
surveillance point, so at least with some of the companies we're already talking about
starting to do some sequencing of the virus in individuals that do well, in individuals that
don't do well, so that as soon as there starts to be an issue we know, and then really having a
sense of where is the epitope that's being targeted so that we can stay on top of this. We don't want
to start having people fail monoclonal therapy only later to find that we're actually trying to give
a therapy that's binding in epitope, which has now been changed. Early inflammatory phase,
we're learning a little bit more about the encephalitis, and actually it was a nice article in CID,
clinical infectious disease. SARS-CoV-2 encephalitis is a cytokine release syndrome
evidence from cerebral spinal fluid analysis, and actually they went ahead and described that
the encephalitis was associated with glial activation, neuroinflammatory markers, and so
really sort of interesting getting more in the lines of what I think we've thought over time.
People have not really detected virus in the CSF, but it looks like this is an inflammatory
driver here. The multi-inflammatory phase, I want to sort of reinforce what we're seeing here,
is this disease can often, the inflammatory part of this disease, can often be bi-modal.
So people come in, they often come in during that second week, right, when they're starting to
have their early inflammatory phase, starting to have trouble breathing, hypoxic, increased
respiratory rate. We get them through that, we feel like they're better than they go out the door,
but as I've tried to remind people about 10% of people will come back, and they will come back
during this, we'll say, late week three, four, the late or the multi-system inflammatory phase,
and then it's really critical that people appreciate this is when you can either have a
resurgence of the inflammatory response, you can have secondary infections, you can have clots,
you really need to sort this out. Some individuals never even end up in the hospital during the
early inflammatory phase, and we just see them during this late inflammatory phase. So really
critical to do this, again, I'll hit this again, but this is why we don't want to just clap those
folks out the door, we want to make sure they have good close follow-up so that if they have an issue,
they can be treated, they can be linked to care. The tail phase, I always make sure I want to
spend some time on this, but persistent poor health post-COVID-19 is not associated with
respiratory complications or initial disease severity. This was a study out of Ireland and
it actually highlighted that even people with mild outpatient disease can have prolonged issues.
I think that's critical. We talked about an article last time where when people were really ill,
when people were in the ICU, that there actually was an increased risk of cognitive issues
and more severe with more severe disease. Another article in the Lancet, six-month
consequences of COVID-19 in patients discharged from hospital, a cohort study,
and here they looked six months out. And what did they see? Fatigue or muscle weakness in 63%
sleep difficulties, 26% anxiety or depression, 23%. And the median six-minute walking distance,
less than the lower limit of normal in about 20 to 30% of individuals. So just for all the people
that have this idea that you live or you die, unfortunately, this is what I'm quite concerned
about. People talk about economics and we've got to really keep everything open. We really
have to be careful that we're not creating. I mean, I look at that 300,000 individuals who get
infected in one day. What percent of those individuals are going to die? That's one thing.
What percent of those individuals are going to have sleep difficulties, anxiety, depression,
the inability to work, to be productive, and actually even to have social and family interactions.
So really tough here and I want to point that out. And then our fundraiser. We got a little
bit. We're about halfway through January. So we're about three quarters of the way through our
Peace Corps HIV and AIDS program fundraiser. So if you get the time, drop what you're doing,
unless you're driving, don't drop what you're doing. Go to parasiteswithoutboarders.com
and help us continue our work and help us support the Peace Corps.
Daniel, on Monday, New Jersey changed its vaccine regulations to include anyone over 65. Doesn't
matter what you do, anyone. So that's I've got an appointment for next Tuesday because of that.
If I were in New York, probably couldn't get it yet.
No, New York actually is the same. New York has gone 65 and up. Now, you couldn't get
it in New York just because we have issues, not because of an AIDS restriction.
Because you had mentioned student facing educators over 65, but you're saying all 65 and over in
New York as well as New Jersey, right? Yeah, in New York, it first went to 75, very quickly,
went to 65. I didn't realize you were over 65, Vincent, because you look so young and vital.
Thank you very much. Thank you. All right, we have a few email for you. Samantha writes,
I'm a clinical lab scientist in California. I have a question about CT values from PCR testing
in our lab. A few months back, I read that the FDA was forbidden hospital labs from releasing
CT values because they could potentially be misrepresented or could possibly misrepresent
the true patient condition. For example, a good sample versus a poor sample. After listening to
Dr. Griffin's update, it seems as though the FDA has reconsidered its position on CT,
we currently run our SARS-CoV-2 testing on an instrument called BD max. It gives CT values in
the test report, but we report only positive or negative to the providers. We're in the process
of validating a second PCR analyzer made by Perkin Elmer, but I don't know much about it,
except it's more sensitive to smaller amounts of viral RNA than the max. Long story short,
how can we get the CT information out to our medical team with the appropriate interpretive
information to go along with it? I imagine that a majority of our providers won't fully understand
the result that reads something like positive CT 32 or something along those lines. Any input
is appreciated. This is fantastic, and this is why it's so important to talk to people that are
on the ground. When the CDC changed its guidance, when the FDA changed its guidance, they said,
oh, yeah, you're welcome to share this information, and then it was in the New York Times.
And then there was the, oh, yeah, you've been able to share it all along. Well,
that messaging was not clear. The messaging that was out there, the messaging that people
received, was you can't share those CT values. So now the messaging is you can share those CT
values, and the question is, how do you do it? So I do think it's really important that we put
this in the reports. We're super busy. So currently, what I have to do, what a lot of the providers
have to do is we have to pick up the phone. We've got to call molecular. We've got to give them
the information. We've got to get to the right person. It takes a really long time to get that
number. So it would be fantastic to have it in the report. Now, the way results are reported
is really, really interesting. We have sometimes where they do a sputum and they say, oh, normal
floor. And then at some centers in bold, they say MRSA and pseudomonas not detected. And that
sort of gives a little tip to the clinician on what they might do. So my suggestion here,
for all who are listening, go ahead, still reported as positive, but then put in the print below it,
some ranges, a little level, little information about, we are running our cycles out to,
let's say it's 40 cycles, whatever it might be. And then just put what the CT value actually
is. And then, over time, we'll continue to educate, like a viral load with HIV, like a viral load
with hepatitis C, we'll be able to make sense of what those numbers are. It's also critical
that you put in the analyzer, right? Because there is a little variability from center to center,
there's variability from machine to machine. And as long as you know that, oh, this is a
perk at Elmer that was run on, we have the same issues with antibody index, antibody levels,
you know, PT Prothrombin INR. So yeah, I would love that if I'm able to look, and I'm able to
actually see positive negative and then below it can be that CT value. Page writes, Hi, Dr.
Griffin should people who test positive for COVID-19 or had positive antibodies still get vaccinated?
I know the answer is yes, but I want to know why. So yes, the answer is yes. And the reason is,
as we've we've talked about several times, is natural infection provides some natural infection,
provides some protection against reinfection. But it only lasts for a certain period of time.
And over time, your chance of getting reinfected diminishes. It certainly does not provide what
we think is going to be a 94 95% protection out to a year or two, which is what Moderna is starting
to suggest. We don't think it's going to be close to 100% protection against severe COVID.
So the reason you want to get vaccinated is you want that really high level protection
that vaccines can produce, because you do not want to get a second infection. Yes, several of the
second infections have been mild. But I was like to remind people some of those second infections
have been quite severe. We've had people with mild first infection, severe second infection.
I was just doing a talk this afternoon on the call with our urgent care physicians in the
tri-state area. And I was speaking with Bonnie Simmons, and that at some of the sites they had
done I think 5,000 tests. And she was relating one of the sites that is over by the Verrazano
Bridge void any HIPAA violations that one site had done 100 tests. One of it was a family.
The whole family came in and the whole family was sick. They all tested positive. They had
actually been sick and positive at that same facility back in April. So we are certainly seeing
reinfections. Terry writes, Dr. Griffin recently you stated patients who receive monoclonal antibody
infusion for COVID should wait 90 days to get vaccine. What's the harm in getting the vaccine 30 or 60
days after the infusion? I understand the vaccine may not be as effective at producing an immune
response. But aren't you taking a risk of the patient getting reinfected with COVID if you wait
90 days? So this is a fantastic question. And we've actually had individuals, had a husband and
wife where the wife went ahead and she got the monoclonal antibodies. But the husband didn't want
to because he wanted to get vaccinated. It's now in the hospital. And the issue is the monoclonal
antibodies will use bamelinibab, half-life of about 21 days, say, Regeneron, the cocktail,
half-life in the mid-20s. Once you get these antibodies, and this is being studied, but we think
it's true, once you get these antibodies for three months, you have high enough level that we do not
think you can be infected or reinfected. So the idea here is a person gets infected. They get
their monoclonal antibodies. They actually are immunized for three months. And then at the end
of the three months, as I like to point out, there will be less COVID circulating. There will be shorter
lines. So the reason I say waiting is you might as well wait, you're already immune. You've already
been immunized passively. So wait those 90 days, let those antibodies get out of your system,
and then go ahead and get your vaccine. All right, one more because this one is
more of a comment. Hugh writes, thank you for your comments about penalizing versus helping
vaccine administrators. I cringed when I heard Governor Cuomo threaten providers who vaccinated
out of order with $1 million fines and loss of license. Granted, he was worried about the
wealthy and influential jumping the line, the unfairness and the terrible public perception of
that. But such a massive threat also operates in terrorism. It shifts the risk of even inadvertent
error to the providers. What documentation of eligibility must be presented to protect the
provider from this dreadful liability? If I vaccinate someone who is not yet eligible,
is it a status crime, regardless of what the patient said or my intent? Where I in New York,
I might let thought vaccine go to waste rather than risk this wrath. In DC is grocery store
pharmacy had ready vaccine after all the healthcare workers present had been vaccinated. At the end
of the day, rather than let it go, they announced overhead that anyone wanting a vaccination should
report to the pharmacy. We need strong leadership to get through this. We also need thoughtful and
foresightful leaders. Thank you for your updates. Hugh is both an MD and a lawyer.
But no, I appreciate this. We have made it so hard and so difficult and all these trust issues that
the majority of vaccine produced in our country is sitting in freezers. It's not in people's arms.
This carceral approach, it doesn't make sense. The abuse has happened anyway,
and I don't think anyone will get fined. I think we've spent so much time and so much
effort focused on equity and who should be in the front of the line, that the line's not even
moving. There's no point, as I like to say, being 10th in line in a line that is not moving,
I'd rather be 100th in line than a line that is moving really quickly. We really have to ask,
how can we help make this work? We really need to get those lines moving. Instead of addressing
issues with threats, let's address these issues with offers of help. How do we make it work?
It's kind of crazy that not every dose is not in an arm. It's totally crazy.
It is amazing. All right, that is COVID-19 clinical update number 45 with Dr. Daniel Griffin.
Thank you, Daniel. Thank you, Vincent, and everyone, be safe.
