This week in virology, the podcast about viruses, the kind that make you sick.
From MicroTV, this is Twiv, this week in virology, episode 710 recorded on January 21, 2021.
I'm Vincent Racken Yello, and you're listening to the podcast all about viruses. Joining me today
from New York, Daniel Griffin. Hello, everyone. Clinical update number 46, Daniel. I have a
feeling we're going to pass 50. Unfortunately, we are. We will not be through this in four weeks,
but I am going to be positive today. So let me start off. We have a lot to cover. I want to
make sure we hit it all. And I know people are busy. You can listen to this at 1.5 or 2x if that
helps, but two quotations by the same individual. The greatness of a community is most accurately
measured by the compassionate action of its members. And the other same person, struggle
is a never-ending process. Freedom is never really won. You earn it and win it every generation.
And this was by Coretta Scott King, the wife of Martin Luther King. And I bring these up sort
of as we go forward. You'll see where I get with this, but I think that we've been talking a lot
about vaccinations, making sure that we are doing this in a compassionate manner. I don't think
people have tried to not do it that way, but there's been a lot of really difficult issues,
particularly for seniors, striving long distances, struggling through a really difficult process
to get appointments, ending up showing up, and there's no vaccines. We'll get into that.
But I think the others also struggle as a never-ending process. I want to remind people as we get
through this, as we're like right now, really in really difficult times, we need to be vigilant.
We need to continue to fight for that situation we are hoping to get to, where we are free from
this pandemic, so that this never happens again. So I think we want to remember that.
So my three quotations, my rules, I will call them, never miss an opportunity to vaccinate,
never miss an opportunity to test, and never miss an opportunity to be nice.
These are difficult times. People's tempers have been quite a little bit short. If we're
going to get through the next few months, we have to work together. We have to be collegial,
we have to communicate. All right, this is where I say if you're on the wrong airplane,
if you're headed to LA, and that's not your final destination get off, I'm going to talk a lot
about vaccination. So if you don't want to hear about vaccination, turn it off now, switch,
go do something else. So as far as active vaccination, I want to say, I try not to talk
that much about vaccine hesitancy because I feel like that's what's going to be the
challenge in the future. But I do think it's critical that as physicians, we take responsibility
for answering questions about vaccinations. I think there has been a brilliant mistake at
many healthcare systems to think that healthcare workers would not need their questions answered
about vaccinations. They should know already. And we've seen really a significant difference
in success based upon people taking the time to educate healthcare workers about vaccines.
UCSF, well over 80%, when they first said, hey, we've got vaccines, they said, when can I get what?
Mass General, it was in the mid 70s, pro health, I think I mentioned it was over 90% when the call
came out who wants to get vaccinated. But we're hearing that some of the large healthcare systems
here in New York that less than half of their providers and staff are signing up to be vaccinated.
So just because someone's in healthcare doesn't mean they don't have questions that need to be
answered. And I think if we don't give the education, if we don't answer the questions and the public
starts seeing that healthcare providers are not getting vaccinated, that's going to come back to
haunt us down the road. And now this is sort of an FAQ. I get so many questions about vaccines,
so I'm going to start hitting them here. Because remember, this is my chance to answer the questions
for all the curious pro health clinicians and our listening audience. It saves me a ton of
texts and emails a day. But one of the first questions, are we underselling the benefits of
the vaccines? So there's a really nice piece in the New York Times, underselling the vaccine
by David Leonhart. And they quoted our buddy Paul Hotez. If you're an anti-vaxxer and you're still
tuning in, he's the one that likes to get your messages. He draws a parallel, David does,
between underselling the vaccines and sort of the early mask wearing we don't quite know yet,
etc. I don't know if that holds completely true. We try not to get ahead of the science. And I
know that bothers people, but we as scientists, we as as clinicians, the vaccines appear to be
really effective. We are really thinking that they're going to have an impact on transmission.
We don't have the transmission data yet. But I'm going to talk a little about sort of the advice.
Because yeah, why is everyone saying I still have to wear a mask? We're just saying that now.
We are hoping we will be able to change. Should a person wait 90 days after acute infection
before they get that vaccination? Well, what does the CDC as per the CDC, there's no recommended
minimal interval between infection and vaccination. So some physicians are recommending people wait
months after infection get vaccinated. But I have to say several people, including Tom Frieden,
Eleanor Murray up at Boston University. And I'm going to jump in on this too. I am concerned.
We are concerned that when you tell people to wait 90 days, right now they're all excited.
They want to get vaccinated. I don't know how they're going to feel in 90 days. You don't want
to feed the anti-vax movement. There's no science that says you have to wait. Person feels fine.
They've recovered from their infection. My answer is in line, I'll say with the CDC, which is back.
Welcome back CDC. You know, never miss an opportunity to vaccinate. If you say wait three months,
you are missing that opportunity. Let's not do that. I have heard people who previously had
COVID and then had a bad reaction to the vaccine, right? Sort of feeds into that first one. Should
people who have had COVID still get vaccinated? And again, the CDC is very clear here on encouraging
all to get vaccinated. We've definitely seen people have reactogenicity. So significant
reactions after the vaccine. Some of those people had COVID before. Some of the people did not.
So only anecdotes. Millions of people have been vaccinated. No clear science to support this
fear. So when you hear, oh, I had COVID and I had a bad reaction. There's a there's a matching person
who never had COVID and had a rough reaction. So people who are not vaccinated. We're concerned
that can get reinfected. We're concerns that just because your first time with COVID wasn't so bad.
Maybe the second time will be worse. So I've certainly certainly seen people who had COVID
earlier on. And we've certainly seen many reports of reinfection. So the vaccine protection is better
than natural exposure. If a person had a severe reaction from the first vaccination, what should
they expect from the second shot? So in general, and this is what the science suggested when we
have the early studies. This is what our experience is reinforcing. The first reaction, whatever you
get, it's usually a little bit more significant the second time. So if they'll kind of achy a
little tired the first time, you will probably feel a little more achy, a little more tired
the second time. If that reaction was rather severe, then I think it's reasonable for that person to
have a conversation with an educated person, a physician, I'm going to say here, who is familiar
with with this situation. I've done several consultations. And I think this makes sense. I
mean, a lot of people don't want to be heard of like cattle. They don't want to be marched
through the Javits Center. Particularly, I'll say older individuals, they may want to sit down.
They may want to have a conversation with their primary care physician or infectious
disease specialist, someone familiar with vaccination. People want to talk to their doctors. That's
fine. And actually, I encourage that. And I think this feeds into what I talked up front about.
We haven't tried to do this. We haven't tried to be cruel. We haven't tried to make this process
difficult. But in a lot of ways, it has been difficult. Particularly now, as we've rolled it out to
older individuals, I describe the situation where my mom, unfortunately, had some challenges.
And you know, just here she is in a strange situation. She's not with a health care provider,
she trusts. I described an individual in his 80s who drove two and a half hours to Mount Sinai,
only to find out that the vaccines have been taken to the Javits Center. We need to do a better job.
And I think that's about to happen. That's the optimism here. We are about to have a really
good national plan. And that's what I'm hearing. What about people that had multi-system inflammatory
issues with COVID? Should they get vaccinated? And I had a very interesting
individual that I took care of this last weekend. It's actually a physician that I know. And we took
care of him back in April, when he actually developed what we believe was an autoimmune,
mediated ataxia. He ended up with steroids IVG then. He actually developed those symptoms
about 14 days into his acute illness. Back in December, he got his vaccine. And about 14
days later, he noticed that he was having trouble writing. He noticed his eyes were sort of wandering
a little bit, noticed a little bit of ataxia. Tried to set him up in the outpatient setting for
steroids and IVG. Welcome to the world of private insurance. Pre-offs were required.
He ended up requiring hospitalization to get that therapy. He is feeling better.
So a person who has severe COVID the first time around or had what we think was an auto
antibody-mediated issue, that's an individual who should consult with a physician. That makes
sense. Consult with a physician, come up with a plan. I guess that's a recurring theme. I don't
think everyone needs to... We saw a little bit of a disaster at Jones Beach, where you had all
these older individuals sitting for hours in this line of cars, waiting for sort of the hurting
cattle car approach to vaccination. That's fine for some people, but a lot of other people need a
different setting for them to have vaccination. A lot of people would probably need something
where there's a home visit, where someone can come to the home. There's a lot of homebound
individuals. This is the big one. I get this all the time. I think I get this because people don't
like my answer and they want to hear a new one. Do I still need to wear a mask if all my friends
have been vaccinated? Now, this really comes down to the issue as I talked about. We do not have
the science yet to tell us about transmissibility, but let's run through a couple scenarios.
I'm going to use my mom again. I think she likes that I talk about her. Here's a woman in her 80s.
My youngest brother, Ben, he has twins, and he just had a new baby over the last year. My mother
is dying to go down and see him. When she has gotten her second shot and two weeks go by,
is it okay for her to go down to visit my younger brother, to hug her grandchildren?
From her perspective, she's safe. I'm going to say, mom, you can go. Now, my brother has to
look at the fact that my mom, even though she's vaccinated, she still potentially could get
transmit to him. But I think we need to start looking at this. A lot of older individuals,
and I'm going to live forever. They've missed a lot of really important things.
Do they want to get out of the house? Do they want to hug their kids? Do they want to have that
at human contact? The vaccine really protects them. They're in the bulletproof car. The rest of
the people that are not vaccinated still still at risk don't think a vaccinated person is less at
risk. And that also relates the same to quarantine issues. If someone's been vaccinated, and now
they're exposed to someone, all the quarantine stuff applies. When I'm so much worried about
them, it's, again, worried about transmission risk. So if you had a reaction to an mRNA vaccine,
then is it fine to just go ahead with the J&J vaccine? Because everyone thinks that's about to
come out and get EUA in the coming weeks. Now, it's not entirely clear that it's safe to
just go ahead with the J&J. And one of the issues is that we think a lot of the allergic
reactions are due to PEG, polyethylene glycol 2000. And there's a very similar
polysorbate that is in the adenoviral vaccine. So there may be some cross reactivity.
We don't know, just to say we don't know, we do think that the protein vaccine by Novavax
will sort of be safer because it's not going to have it in there. But one of the things I'm
going to say, we'll end up talking a lot about J&J. The J&J platform has been given to over 200,000
people. We are not seeing the significant level of the anaphylactic and allergic reactions we're
seeing with the mRNA vaccine. So I want to throw that in there. This will be a judgment call.
Again, you got a bad reaction with the first vaccine. You're going to have to make a decision
with someone knowledgeable. And you want to probably consider getting that vaccine in a setting
where you can have a longer observation period and be treated if you have any issue.
Now, this is going to be sort of an operational in the weeds. We are trying not to throw out
additional doses. So what happens? And I want to sort of describe this for people.
We're going to be doing our second round of vaccinations for pro health. We did what we
were supposed to write. We got our 1,200 vaccines. And we immediately gave all those 1,200 vaccines
to all our employees, and they're gone. We didn't put any in the freezer. I mean,
I don't think that surprises any of our listeners, but I am a big fan of vaccines go into people's
arms, not into freezers. Now, we are going to get our next shipment on Tuesday. It's arriving. And
this is a change. We actually were told ahead of time yesterday, we actually were told,
hey, by the way, just to confirm you will be getting your second dose vaccines coming next
Tuesday. Now, when we did our first vaccines, what we saw several times was that instead of
there being just 10 doses in the bio, there might be 11. You might actually have a bio with 12 doses.
So in certain circumstances, instead of doing just 10 people, we did that 11th person. We're
now hoping now, right, when we get our second 1,200 doses, do we have those extra few doses
that we gave to people? And again, as the issue, like let's say it's the first night,
and I worked at one place with that long beach. And I was there for a couple hours and I did 31
vaccinations, right? So that was three vials. One of the vials had an extra dose. So we got that
31st person. I am hoping that things work in our favor. We also have 31. But what if we have a
vial, which has only 10, 10, 10? What do we do with that extra person? We don't want to send
them away. Do you open another vial? This is where we're talking about coordination. We're actually
going to set up a call center so that people can say, okay, I don't want to open a new vial
for one person. But if you drive 15 minutes, our free port site will have a vaccine. So people
really need to be thinking through the logistics here. We do not want to throw vaccines to the
trash. And I'm going to quote George Benjamin, the president of the American Public Health
Association. Principle number one is don't waste the vaccines. I'm very excited. I have to say
that Dr. Kessler is going to be the head of the Biden Task Force. He's been talking a lot about
improving the operations of getting vaccines out there. We're expected to have transparency
on how many doses are produced, where those doses are. And at the end, we really want to
increase the efficiency. And he uses the analogy of the airplane. I feel like maybe we use that
here. You know, you find out we've got most of the people in first class boarded. But somebody's
running 15 minutes late. You start boarding the rest of the airplane. And when that person who
shows up 15 minutes late, you get them in as well. Let's make things move forward. Let's make this
efficient. Let's move away from this, you know, threat of punishment when you do things wrong
to getting those doses in people's arms and the dialect being how can we help.
All right, that's it for vaccines, active vaccines.
Now, what about the pre-exposure period, right? Just want to hit a little bit on testing.
There was a Bynax now antigen test sensitivity for culture positive specimens
showed a 92.6% and a 78.6% for those symptomatic and asymptomatic. So again, sort of reinforcing
that people who have a high level of virus, people who are in that infectious period that the antigen
is actually really a great way of picking those folks up. This was in the MMWR. So it's nice to
get a little more information. I don't think we have as much information as we would like on
asymptomatic persons using our testing technology. So great to have a little more information there.
Now we get up to passive vaccination. So here we are. We're the period of detectable viral
replication. A person has symptoms. It's week one. What can we do during week one? If the person
meets criteria, this is when we jump in with our monoclonal antibody therapy. So we heard a little
bit about bamlinibimab, the Mayo experience greater than 2,000 patients. And then they're
suggesting an efficacy of 70% and a mortality benefit. But I'm also going to talk a little bit.
This is an exciting day. We're recording this on the 21st of January. But we actually got a
little more information from Eli Lilly. And they actually released some data where they were
looking at giving this antibody, bam, bam, bamlinibimab, to nursing homes. So residents and staff at
skilled nursing and assisted living facilities. And what they did is this was a study 965 participants
start off with a baseline negative for SARS-CoV-2 virus. So there were 299 residents. There were
666 staff. And basically they're following to who gets infected and does anyone die? And they
actually in this, which right now it's still the press release stage. I'll be excited when I see
per review. But the residents randomized to bamlinibimab had an 80% lower risk of developing COVID-19.
The individuals in the placebo group, there were four deaths. There were zero deaths in the
residents that received the bamlinibimab. And those were four deaths due to COVID. So continuing to
get more information on the bamlinibimab, we have our trial up and running at United in research.
We've already been infusing people in home. So we're hoping to get more and more information.
So people go to United in research. It's the lead study there. They pre-register while they're
still healthy. And then if an individual develops COVID, the system is activated. And we are giving
in-home infusions, which ideally is when this therapy and how this therapy should be given.
All right. The early inflammatory phase, I'm going to hit on vitamin D again.
Nice article. Vitamin D status is associated with in-hospital mortality and mechanical ventilation,
a cohort of COVID-19 hospitalized patients. And this was Mayo Clinic proceedings.
Retrospective observational cohort study. Done it to tertiary academic medical centers in Boston
and New York. Eligible patients had to be hospitalized. And they basically broke them down into people
that had very high vitamin D levels, so greater than 30 nanograms per milliliter and people that
had very low, so say less than 30 nanograms per milliliter. So people that had very high levels,
9.2% mortality, people that had low levels, 25.3% mortality. So we're actually seeing, again,
at least when you come in, it's very predictive, actually predictive for need for mechanical ventilation.
So keep those vitamin D levels up. Again, we do not know. We've seen studies both ways on
once you get into the hospital, but we're trying to avoid that, trying to keep people out of the
hospital. Again, we don't know that if you prospectively brought people's levels up, brought it down,
or if this is more of a marker for something else, but just more information out there on vitamin D.
Anti-quagulation. I know I talked a little bit last time about the full dose. Anti-quagulation
was removed from some of the ACTIV trials, but now we actually saw intermediate dose,
anti-quagulation, aspirin, and in-hospital mortality in COVID-19, a propensity score-matched analysis.
This came out as a preprint from some researchers and clinicians up at Yale. And we know that
clotting complications are common. We know that this is a major issue in COVID, and some degree
of anti-quagulation is standard, but we're still trying to clarify what dose, what agent. Nice to
see a little data here, more data here on aspirin being thrown into the mix here. And they actually
were looking, they were comparing intermediate, which is sort of, we'll say, if you're going to use
low-molecoate heparin, clinicians are listening in now, instead of the once a day, you might go up
to twice a day. That's our intermediate. We might go up to twice a day for weight-based dosing.
And this study actually suggested that there was a benefit to intermediate dosing, also a benefit
to being on aspirin, so sort of using intermediate, slightly higher-dose anti-quagulation, not full
dose, and anti-aspirate as well. All right, what about IL-6 receptor inhibition? I know it's been
a while since I've talked about tosyllizumab, but we have some new data out. The REM cap,
interleukin-6 receptor antagonist in critically ill patients with COVID-19, a preliminary report.
So this was a randomized embedded multi-factorial adaptive platform trial for community acquired
pneumonia, so you get your REM-CAP, and adult patients with COVID-19 within 24 hours of
commencing organ support in an ICU. So we're looking here at timing. We're also looking at a
background of steroids. So over 93% of these people had a background of steroids. We're going to
hit on that again. But it wasn't being given to people in late stage. It wasn't given to people
particularly early. It was given right when we saw an escalation of, I'm going to say,
the cytokine storm. So the timing was what we've talked about. People were either randomized to
receive the tosyllizumab or seruleumab, another IL-6 receptor antagonist, or standard of care.
And the primary outcome was in-hospital mortality. So this is hospital mortality was 28% for people
that got tosy, 22% for people that got seruleumab, and 36% for controls.
So this gives us about a 22 to a 38% reduction in mortality, statistically significant.
So again, the advantages of this trial background, pre-medication with steroids. The tosyllizumab
is given what most of us have said for a while here is the right stage during the early inflammatory
stage, people that are progressing. And actually about 30% of the folks got a second dose of tosyllizumab.
So just to sort of recap here, we now have the impact to trial with a 44% reduction in need
for mechanical intervention with use of tosy in a background of steroids. The covecta trial
demonstrating a reduction in hospital duration. And now the REMCAP data showing a rather impressive
mortality benefit if given after steroids with attention to timing. And now we're waiting for
the recovery trial. Now on one slash 11, January 11, the recovery trial, independent data monitoring
committee recommended continuing recruitment to their tosyllizumab treatment arm. So that's
encouraging. This is going to give us data on about 3000 individuals with a background of steroids
in COVID in the UK. So at least when they looked over, they were not seeing any reason why they
should stop. So that will be helpful to really clarify the role and timing of tosyllizumab.
Okay, the secondary infection phase. Another nice article prevalence of
co-infection at the time of hospital admission in COVID-19 patients, a multi-center study.
This is an open form infectious disease. Yes, that is a fine journal reporting they looked at
over 1000 patients. And at the time of admission, only about 1% had what they felt were bacterial
respiratory co-infections, reinforcing looking at this disease as far as timing. When people come
in the door, it is really uncommon, less than 10%, maybe closer to 1%. If there's a bacterial
process going on, it's the later stage. It's week three when we really start seeing the infections.
And at that point, we see combination. We see a lot of bacterimias, we see pneumonias,
we see incidents of fungal. Multi-system inflammatory phase comes sort of at that.
It's important to keep reinforcing the bi-modal aspect of the inflammatory process. We have
the early inflammatory, and then we have the late or the multi-system inflammatory phase.
We haven't been hearing much about this. I don't know if there's so much any more
new news as much as now we appreciate this. We're addressing it sometimes children,
sometimes adults. We don't even see them in the hospital. Initially, they come in just
during this late stage. The tail phase, a number more studies. I actually really appreciate the
attention here. One of the studies was COVID-19 post acute care study group persistent symptoms
in patients after acute COVID. That was in JAMA looking at 143 Italian patients hospitalized
for COVID-19. Eighty-three percent continued to have at least one symptom. Sixty days post
discharge, right? So reinforcing this isn't you just get better. Another study, COVID-19 symptoms,
longitudinal evolution and persistent in outpatient settings in the annals of internal medicine.
This was 669 Swiss patients with positive tests for COVID-19. Mostly outpatients, right? So
32 percent continued to have at least one symptom at a mean of 43 days after discharge. So even
your mild folks, even your outpatients, continuing to see symptoms here. So let's want to thank
everyone for taking the time. We're still doing our fundraiser, still trying to help the P-score
HIV and AIDS program. So go to parasiteswithoutborders.com, go to donate and help us continue to do what
we're doing as well as support the P-score. All right, Daniel, a couple questions. I had one
and you partially answered, but let me just confirm. So if someone is fully vaccinated,
two doses and they're exposed to someone, you said they should still be quarantined,
but that is a nine day, not a 14 day quarantine. Is that correct?
So quarantine versus isolated. So, you know, I try to make the distinction and it really only
matters in certain states. So, you know, the CDC has made it 10 and 10. They've lined them
right up. So if you're infected, you wait 10 days. Actually, it was a really nice study showing
that after nine days, you're really not seeing, they were not able to culture virus, right? So that
was really good on the isolated for the infected. The quarantine, this has gotten a little bit.
The CDC said, let's just use the 10 days. They've even talked about a seven day test out,
where you just you quarantine for seven days. If you're still feeling fine at day seven, you get
a test. You can end your quarantine early. You could just wait for 10 if you don't want to test
and just do symptoms. This was analyzed. You will miss about 20%, about 20% of people will
develop symptoms, or turn positive if you use the seven day test that option.
What about vaccinated people? Is there a day?
We're not we don't treat them any differently yet, just because we don't we don't know.
And it is tough. People are like, come on. I've been vaccinated. What am I doing?
Yeah, it's not about you. This is about transmission.
Okay. We just don't know, but we will. We will.
All right. A couple of email. Tarrin writes, hello, I work at a big academic
hospital. I'm almost 14 days post second Pfizer vaccine. Our hospital uses Abbott SARS-CoVIG assay.
A couple of my coworkers have gone to get tested, come back negative. The results specifically
state they can't be used for vaccine efficacy verification. What can be used for that? Anything?
So I've been telling people, just don't check your serologies. Just go ahead,
trust the data, trust the science, trust the protection. Yeah, there is a commercially
available neutralizing antibody assay. But again, I don't want to encourage you to do that. So yeah,
just go ahead, get your vaccine, stop doing all the blood work. Let's focus our resources on the
critical areas. All right. This is from Anthony. I do a live stream with Amy every Wednesday night,
and he heard it last night. And the topic came up of taking NSAIDs after vaccination to reduce
discomfort. If memory serves me correctly, someone even suggested taking it and over the
counter painkiller before vaccination, someone else thought NSAIDs reduced the effectiveness
of vaccination. What's the correct thing to do for years? I used aspirin to reduce pain so I
could exercise more than I read that this diminished the exercise effect.
Yeah, I get this question a lot, actually. And I'm thinking it might be like an anti-vaxxer thing.
If you feel crummy up to the vaccine, don't take anything. It won't work. They want everyone to
suffer a little bit more. You know, I got my second dose of vaccine on Tuesday morning.
And I had a few side effects, right? Like at one point, I opened an email from my partner
Nujali and I felt a little annoyed for a couple minutes. I'm sure it was the vaccine, not the
content of the email. And then I had a meeting yesterday. It was supposed to be at four. I thought
it was at three. So a little bit of a cognitive impact getting confused there. You know, and I
did. I felt a little achy, actually. I mean, you know, it wasn't big. I took a couple of leave.
I think that that's fine. I don't think there's any, you know, get Breanne Barker to jump in on this.
But you know, if you take a couple of leave, take a couple of ad bill, you take NSAIDs. I don't
think that that's going to prevent your B cells and T cells from doing their job. So
not a problem from my perspective. All right. One more from Karen, whose mother in November
contracted COVID-19. She's an assisted living facility, had a hard time, has a lot of comorbidities.
And at one point, she decided she didn't want to eat anymore, which they took it to determine
was her, her will not not to live. So they asked that she'd be placed in hospice care rather than
going to the hospital. So she would like to know a little discussion of hospice or palliative care
decisions in your clinical updates, Daniel. Sure. Sure. Actually, I appreciate that you bring
this up. We don't talk about this or a lot or haven't talked about this. But on a daily basis,
this is part of our our birthday. We try to get a sense of where people are headed, how they're
going to do. And there certainly are a lot of individuals where early on we realized that
that their chance of coming out of this in a positive way is low. And actually, you know,
sort of a little bit of a hats off to Northwell. They actually at Plainview Hospital, where I spend
a lot of time, they actually recruited and they have a full time palliative care specialist. And
she and I talk quite a bit just lovely, brilliant woman. I think she speaks more languages than I
have fingers. And we actually have specialists get involved, have conversations with the family.
You know, what are the goals of care? What would what would your loved one want?
Often, and it's wonderful when the loved one can be part of that decision making.
And yeah, so this is a big part. You really you really want to have this conversation before
someone gets sick. You want to share your your goals, your your desires with your family. I'm
started talking to the individuals who might end up getting COVID here, which is a lot of us
before so that when someone ends up in the hospital, you know, I actually worked with
intending who was a physicist and he used to refer to this as the fifth vital sign. You know,
you know, you want to know, you know, on the admission, what would this person want? What are
their goals of care? And often people who I consult for I will often put my recommendations in,
but then I'll also put a little tagline about, you know, these should be consistent with goals
of care. Particularly in the surge conditions, this would come up quite a bit. Does this individual
really want to be here in the hospital? Or is this an individual? Is this a family context where
they would prefer to be home? They'd prefer to be in a hospice setting? And I will say, my
stepsister is a hospice nurse. Hospice is not, ooh, someone's just about to die. It is a it is a
change in the goals of care. And a lot of times, just to qualify a hospice, you're saying, I think
they're less likely to live six months. So the mistake people often make when they think about
palliative care is they wait too long to make these decisions. They wait too long to have these
conversations. And I appreciate you bringing it up because I think this is critical. This is
no one wants to talk about this, but everyone should talk about it so that when we get to this
point, we know what you really want us to be doing. That's COVID-19 clinical update number 46 with
Dr. Daniel Griffin. Thank you, Daniel. Oh, thank you so much, Vincent. And everyone, be safe.
