This week in virology, the podcast about viruses, the kind that make you sick.
From Microbe TV, this is Twib, this week in virology, episode 713 recorded on January 29,
2021. I'm Vincent Rackeniello, and you're listening to the podcast all about viruses.
Joining me today from New York, Daniel Griffin. Hello, everyone.
How'd your immunization go, Daniel? It went incredibly well. We're getting consistently 12
doses per vial, so actually it got even a little bit extra last night. I was able to,
with five vials, vaccinate 62 people. Wow, good job. There's something for me like,
I am exhausted, but then I vaccinate that many people, and I'm full of all this energy. I can't
sleep. I just like settle down. It's okay. Nice. Very good. But all right, we got a lot to cover
today. So let me start with my quotation. There are no problems, only solutions. And I think that's
from a song by John Lennon. All right, I have my three rules, and I keep updating these. Never
miss an opportunity to vaccinate, never miss an opportunity to test, and never waste a vaccine dose.
My view is every vaccine dose is a chance to save a life. So we got to get those into arms.
So we have a lot of exciting new information to share. So start with active vaccination.
So a quick update on the Novavax protein-based vaccine candidate. We have some interim analysis
in the form of a press release. So because we're getting used to that. And it's sort of funny
because you read it through and obviously the PR department was involved. So what is this Novavax
vaccine? So it contains a full-length, pre-fusion spike protein made using the Novavax recombinant
nanoparticle technology. Now I'm not getting paid by them. And the company's proprietary
saponin-based matrix M adjuvant. Basically what they do is they've got the they've got the
spike protein that they purify. It's made in insect cells, which is actually kind of interesting
because you know I know my two daughters are pretty much vegan. So this might be something they can
use. There's no replication. It's really just the protein. And think of it as like a flower,
right? With the spikes all sticking out from the center. And this study enrolled over 15,000
participants from 18 to 84 years of age. About a quarter of them were over the age of 65.
And the primary endpoint was PCR confirmed, symptomatic mild moderate or severe COVID-19.
And it had to be seven days after the second study vaccination. So this is something we're
going to talk about. When do you start looking? When do you say it's time to judge the efficacy?
So I would say seven days seems to me a little bit early. But I think they were very confident.
They wanted to kind of get some data out here. And the preliminary data suggested that the
Novavax protein-based vaccine efficacy, and they break it down by strain, right? So it's calculated
to be 95.6% efficacy against the original COVID-19 strain, 85.6% against the UK variant strain,
but only 50% against the South African strain. We'll talk a little bit more about the terminology
strain and variant, but that's what they're saying. This first interim analysis was based
only on 62 cases, right? So this is a preliminary interim analysis. 56 of those cases of COVID-19
were in the placebo group. Six of them were in the people that got this protein-based vaccine.
So overall, you had an efficacy of about 89.3%. There was only one severe case, and that was in
the placebo group. So we're starting to see this consistent, really good efficacy if your end point
is keeping people from ending up with severe COVID, keeping people from dying from COVID.
And this is one of, I'll say, tried-and-true technology, right? This is the vaccine technology
that's used for the new shingrix, the new shingles shot. So more to come. Also, my gosh,
this was vaccine day. So maybe I forgot to give my, you know, get off the flight if you don't
want to hear about vaccines. This is not for you. Spend your time somewhere else. You know,
if you want to send those angry emails, anti-vaxx, or emails at peterhotes.com, I think is where you
send us. J&J vector vaccine. So I've been waiting for this. I thought I was going to have to wait
till Tuesday. So I was excited to have this come out. We keep getting these questions,
and I think I was joking with one of my colleagues today. When is the normal vaccine coming out?
When's the one we just get one shot and you're done? And so, yes, we're getting information here.
So J&J reported that they had met their primary end points in the interim analysis of phase 3.
And again, we got a press release. So we're going to get peer reviewed. We're going to get
more data. And this is going to go, we think, to the FDA soon. Safety and efficacy data based on
43,783 participants. And here we have 468 symptomatic cases. So this is pretty robust data.
So many more cases, you know, here, compared to some of the other ones, right? We were talking
about 100, 118 or so. Here, we have data four weeks after vaccination. And I do want to remind
people that what we learned about from the J&J vaccine, it really takes about eight weeks to get
those antibodies up at 100% of people. So what's the data going to be here? So J&J vaccine,
they report was 85% effective in preventing severe disease across all regions studied,
right? So I'm sort of pointing out that's what we're really concerned about. You know, if someone
gets a little bit of the sniffles and more or less or the mild disease, so looking at keeping people
from ending up with severe disease, keeping people from dying 85% efficacy in all the regions studied
as early as 28 days. And then efficacy against severe disease increased over time to 100%
at day 49, so about seven weeks. So we're only seeing very limited information in this press
release. I'll get back to this when we get more. But what's exciting here is this is an inexpensive,
it's established vaccine technology that's been used hundreds of thousands of people have received
vaccines with this technology. Basically, the safety data, there was nothing, nothing there.
The reactogenicity profile, this is kind of what people were saying. I want to get a shot like
the flu shot, where the only reason I know I got it is because someone poked me with a needle and
they put a sticker on my card or something. But we're going to get more data as we go forward.
But I have to say it was nice to get this data this morning. Before I do FAQs on vaccines,
frequently asked questions, I really want to get a little bit into the weeds. And I was
one of my people that, you know, primary for me, the way this started was using this as a chance to
get all the tri-state physicians that Pro Health New York and other physicians, Riverside
and Pro Health Connecticut providers up to speed on what we need to know. But I'm going to call
this part here. I'm going to call it the Elizabeth Warren, Bernie Sanders approach. You need a plan,
you need to make sure everyone gets the vaccine. But I'm also going to call it the Biden
Buttigieg vaccines for everyone who wants them only at this point. Before you order any vaccines,
you want to have a vaccine reaction kit. You know, you want to have your Benadryl,
you want to have your epinephrine, and then you want to have a plan. If you're going to be opening
a bio, you're going to get 10, 11 or 12 doses, you want to make sure you have a plan for who's
going to get those. And you also want to have a plan for what if someone has a reaction, you know,
with the mRNA vaccines, about 1 in 100,000 people are having reactions, you want to have a plan for
what you're going to do. So let's go through. Part of this, I'll say, you know, conversations
with people and one of the nurses I've been working with was saying, you know, actually just a week
ago, when we started doing some re vaccinations, you know, we're thinking about getting this in
the office, but you know, we just don't have a freezer, so we're not sure. And so let's go through. You
don't need a freezer, you need arms. The Moderna, it arrives frozen. So you just put in the refrigerator,
yes, a normal medical office refrigerator, and it can stay in there for up to 30 days.
I'm not sure there's any reason with the supply relative demand that any vaccine should sit for
30 days in that fridge, but it can. No freezer required. Once in the refrigerator, just leave it
there. Don't put it back in the freezer. It can couple hours and it'll defrost in the refrigerator,
but if you're ready to start vaccinating, you can just take it out, let it sit at room temperature.
For an hour, it's ready to go. Once it's been in the fridge, you only need about 15 minutes out
before you're ready to go. So once you pull out the vial, again, reinforce, have a plan.
If you've got 10 people scheduled and only age show up, have a plan for what you're going to do
with those last two. If you've got a couple doses, have a call, have a call list and plan, like,
don't be like, Oh my gosh, I got to leave at nine for some important date. Don't let those vaccines
go to waste, have a plan. Call on the phone, make sure people are going to come. Once you pull that
vial out of the refrigerator, we're talking about Moderna here, you have 12 hours, just keeping that
at room temperature. Once you puncture the vial, you have six hours puncture the vial. You've got
your syringes ready to go use one ml syringes. I've been posting on Twitter. And if anyone
follow me on Twitter and you'll get my posting on sort of the weeds here, which are the best syringes
to buy, which are the ones so that you get 12 doses per vial instead of 10. That's a 20%
increase in the number of doses. That's huge. And once you once you put these shots in arms,
you observe people for 15 minutes. It doesn't have to be one person at a time. You can actually
look at multiple people at the same time. So often last night, we did, as I mentioned, 62 individuals.
This is actually, for a lot of us, the biggest logistical challenge, where do all those people
wait so you can keep an eye on them? Most people were telling them, set your iPhone,
set your smartphone. It's okay if you have an Android. For 15 minutes, when your alarm goes off,
that's great. A little bit of an oddity. The expiration date is not on the bottles or the box.
You actually have to go to the website and input the lot number. And then you get this date,
and you get the expiration date. So a little bit odd. But listen, you don't need a freezer.
All you need is a medical grade refrigerator. Well, what about Pfizer? Oh my gosh, that's
the ultra cold, right? That's these thermal shippers. It arrives frozen and it can stay frozen in
that thermal shipper for up to 30 days. All you have to do is add a little bit of dry ice every
five days. If you take those vials out, you can put them in a normal refrigerator and they can
sit in that refrigerator for up to five days. When they're in that nation, be sitting in that
fridge for up to five days, right? Because we should be getting those into arms. So it's painful to
say, but you can actually keep those for 35 days from the time you receive the thermal shipper,
right? Every five days, you're adding some dry ice. And at the very end, you put them in the
fridge for the last five days. Once you put them in the refrigerator, it takes a couple hours to
thaw. So give yourself an amount of time, you know, and pull them straight out of the freezer.
If you put them at room temperature, about 30 minutes. But once once they're thawed, you can
pull them out. Once you pull them out, you have about two hours before you do the dilution. And
again, you're going to run into that same once you've diluted them, you're going to get six doses
per vial. If you use the proper syringes, you've got six hours once you mix them up, load your
syringes ready to go. All right, now we've got our FAQs. Some of these are fun. I have to say,
I'm entertained by the questions. But some of them actually speak to a little bit of, I'm going to
say carelessness. What do we do if a person gets a vaccine and they feel crummy for one day,
for two days, for three days? That's a magic rule. We have been noticing, unfortunately,
that some people come in, and they actually have already been exposed. And on day three,
they're still feeling crummy. At that point is when you say we can't just chalk this all up to
react to genicity. And you want to do that COVID test. We've actually had some individuals,
actually several times this has happened. We were talking about this in the urgent care call,
where the whole family comes in. And then they all are there to get vaccinated and turns out
someone in the group feels crummy, comes back later that day or the next day, and then tests
positive. So the rule we're using, test as often as you can. This is an opportunity to test.
We know five to 10% of people that are getting tested are coming back positive. So think about,
you know, you open two vials, probably one or two people are that you're vaccinating is already
positive. They want to know that so that they don't spread it to their families. We can prevent
infections. Once they get the vaccine, 48 hours is typical. If they're feeling crummy at day three,
then you want to evaluate why are they feeling crummy may not be from the vaccine. All right,
I got vaccinated, but my antibody test came back negative. Okay, this is Twiv. So you're going to
get a little bit of nitty gritty science here. When you're getting vaccinated, you are getting
the spike protein so that you can make antibodies against the spike protein. Now,
the end protein is actually the most abundantly produced immunodominant protein. So most of
those tests out there, those serology tests, like the Roche, for instance, they're testing
for antibodies against the end protein. So let's think about it. If I give you spike protein and
you make antibodies against the spike protein, but I send you for a test looking for antibodies
against the end protein, the nucleocapsid protein, it's going to come back negative.
So just to throw it out there, we do not recommending checking serologies. We certainly
don't recommend checking the wrong serologies. So if you do want to check serologies for some
crazy reason, send them to someone with a little bit of a sophisticated understanding.
And then they're going to need a quantitative S protein antibody test. Do I still need to wear
a mask if all my friends have been vaccinated? And so this is this quarantine issue. And I ran
into my buddy Jay Burger the other day, and I ran the scenario by him. I said, so Jay, you know,
I know you want to hang out with me. But what if this? What if you and I and our buddy Conan,
we get together because Conan bought a liquor store and he's going to treat us to this great
new scotch. And we sit around and we've got our masks off because we've all been vaccinated and
we're so excited. And then Conan ends up getting a test the next day because his mother-in-law is
coming to visit and he's positive. I'm like, Jay, you and I, we're quarantined, we're out of work.
So that's that's part of the issue. We do not know if people who've been vaccinated,
we don't know about transmission yet. We really need to know about that. Why are health care workers
not required to get vaccinated? If people listened to the previous twin with Dixon,
he was getting pretty emotional about this. He obviously feels really strong about this,
but where are we with the science? So Dixon was suggesting, and this gets back almost to that first
question that we just talked about. Dixon suggested that an unvaccinated person was more likely to
transmit the virus to others or the corollary that vaccination reduces the chances of transmission
by a person who's been vaccinated. Now here we actually need to stop and say that we do not know
the answer to this question, but we really do need to know the answer to this question. So we have
very limited data from the vaccine trials with PCR surveillance in hundreds, not thousands of
participants suggesting there may be a reduction in infection and potential transmission. We still
did not know if our current vaccines prevent viral transmission. There was a plan to do a major
study on transmission with the Moderna vaccine led by Larry Corey, a virologist at Fred Hutch,
Cancer Center in Seattle, but they did not get the federal funds. And currently my understanding
is that the study is not going forward. The other issue is that these vaccines are not FDA
approved. So even if we knew the answer to the first question, which I am hopefully we will get
the answer to about transmission, there's a major issue mandating something that's not FDA approved.
So throw that out there. What about these syringes with less dead space? What is that? I think Rich
was talking about that. So I've been tweeting a bunch about this for a while. If you use the
right syringes, you get an extra 20%. So Pfizer, five doses, if they send out their
vials with the right syringes that do get six doses, then they count it as six. If they're sent
out with the crummy syringes, they don't get the count extra. Same with Moderna. I guess I'll say
the same with Moderna right now is sending out with the idea that there are 10 doses per
file. But again, if you use the right syringes, you can get 12, maybe even sometimes more. So
this is not common knowledge, I have to say. So if you're thinking about vaccinating,
you're moving forward with vaccinating, reach out, get some guidance, use the right syringes
because 10 to 20% extra vaccine, that really adds up. Instead of 10 million vaccines,
you got an extra one or two million thrown on top. All right, what about school openings?
I always get in trouble when I talk about this. The MMWR early release came out on the 26
one slash 26 slash 2021 COVID-19 cases and transmission in 17 K through 12 schools in Wisconsin.
So the study involved students, staff members in 17 K through 12 schools in rural Wisconsin,
under the district and statewide mask mandates, and they found that the teachers in the study
reported the students had very high masking compliance. And so despite widespread community
transmission, the rates in the schools, 37% lower than in the surrounding community.
A couple things I want to say, the mask use was reported at greater than 92%. They were using
11 to 20 student cohorts. They were doing physical distancing. They were doing the quarantine
after exposures. And of note, they received funds from a foundation to support this strategy. So
we all want our kids to go to school, but we want the kids. We want the teachers. We want
everyone, all the staff involved to be safe. This takes planning. It takes the strategy. It takes
money. You can't just make it happen. Incubation period post exposure. I just always want to
remind everyone that test doesn't predict the future. So don't go have a test and then think
that you don't have to worry. If you're in the incubation period, a test can be negative today.
It can turn positive tomorrow. Now we have some more. A lot of exciting data this week,
passive vaccination. So monoclonal antibodies for COVID. So from Eli Lilly, we have the paper SARS,
COVID-2, neutralizing antibody, LY, COVID-50, 555, and now patients with COVID-19 in the Newland
Journal. That was 75% reduction in COVID-19. That was the Blaze 1 study. From Regeneron,
we had the original paper in the New England Journal. The Regeneron, COVID-2, and neutralizing
antibody cocktail with a 50% reduction. And then we recently discussed the Blaze 2 study
where bamlin imamab decreased infections by 80% in long-term care facility residents.
And the only deaths were in the placebo arm. This is when we were doing it pre-exposure.
But we got a couple new things today. So we have cocktail data from Eli Lilly.
And this was the effect of bamlin imamab as monotherapy or in combination with
a test of a map. Now they should have thrown an L and it could have been a Tesla the map,
but it's not. It would have solved better, I think, on viral load in patients with mild and moderate
COVID-19. So really what this was is they continued sort of a second part of the Blaze 1 study data.
And they were looking at the proportion of patients with COVID-19 related hospitalizations
or ED visits, 5.8% for placebo, 0.9% for the cocktail. So an 84% reduction in COVID-19 related
hospitalizations or ED visits. There are no deaths in the study, so we can't really assess that as well.
Regeneron has got more to tell us, more another press release about their cocktail.
And this is using the cocktail to prevent you from getting COVID-19. And who wouldn't want
to have a cocktail and not get COVID-19? So they looked at 400 individuals. They were randomized
to receive the passive immunization with the Regeneron COVID-2 cocktail. And this was subcutaneous,
right? So what we hear from this press release is passive vaccination with the Regeneron cocktail
resulted in a 100% prevention of symptomatic infection and a 50% lower rate of any infection
at all. And there actually are some pretty exciting things I'm going to go through here.
So the lower number of infections that did happen in the Regeneron COVID-2 therapy,
they were all asymptomatic. So right, 100% prevention of symptomatic in this study. The
infections that did occur in the placebo group had on average more than 100 fold higher peak viral
load in the placebo group than in the vaccinated group. So two log difference. The infections that
did happen in the people that got the cocktail, none of them lasted more than a week where the
people in the placebo group, 40% of them were lasting three to four weeks. No infected individuals
in the cocktail group had viral loads above 10 to the fourth compared to about 62% in the placebo
group. So Regeneron COVID-2 cocktail, given ahead of time, was associated with fewer total viral
shedding weeks, fewer total high viral shedding weeks. So for a recap, the data on the monoclonal
is pre exposure. We have it post exposure. You don't want to give it late. You want to give it early.
And here, I think you're seeing some sort of interesting suggestion that 10 to the fourth,
we're actually thinking that may be below the level of transmission. So people who get high
antibodies, whether they're being given in a cocktail or we're hoping with vaccines,
we are hoping that even if they get infected, that it's going to be resulting in interruption
of transmission. All right, now this, I was so excited about this, but then I became less excited
and then less excited. So this was the Cole Corona study, which we finally saw as a pre-print.
And some really clever person did a little tweet. And they've got like this really like
muscle bound ripped man. And that was the press release. And then they had the abstract,
which was a guy who maybe hadn't been hitting the gym quite as often. And then they had the
results. And it was a guy with the belly hanging over the belt. And that's kind of how I'm feeling
here. So this was a study looking at the efficacy of culture scene in non hospitalized patients with
COVID-19. And as mentioned, we're looking at a pre-prints and not peer reviewed. So this was a
randomized double blind placebo control clinical trial conducted in China in Canada, the United
States, Europe, South America, and South Africa. And it was designed to determine whether
culture scene would reduce the risk of severe complications associated with COVID-19.
And there's some interesting, I'll say background theory on all kinds of ideas about how culture
scene might work, might interfere with the microtubules, might affect the virus, might do immune
modulation. But they ended up they enrolled 4,488 COVID-19 patients, non hospitalized at the time
of enrollment. They ended up analyzing 4,159 patients with a diagnosis of COVID-19.
And those patients with a proven diagnosis of COVID-19 on culture scene versus placebo
hospitalizations, 4.5 versus 5.9. The need for mechanical ventilation, 0.5 versus 0.9 deaths,
0.2 versus 0.4. Nothing reaching statistical significance until you start lumping stuff together.
But then I will add that 13.7% of the culture scene patients developed diarrhea and that added
p value of less than 0.001. So we did reach statistical significance in giving people diarrhea. But
little disappointing looking at over 4,000 patients and seeing this, you know, 0.2 versus 0.4 as far as
death. So I was a little bit disappointed. I was pretty excited that we were going to see
something here based on the press release. Now there's a lot of data coming out and I'm sort of
getting the preliminary stuff on the ATT ACC, the ACTI 4A and the REM CAP studies looking at
anti-coagulation. I've had a chance to look at the interim data so far. But I'm going to put
that on the back burner. That's something we're going to talk about next week. To finish off
with the tail phase, I always want to talk about the tail phase. More information about how long
COVID patients have autoantibodies, suggestions that this may be tied into some of the symptoms.
This is evolving, so we'll get back to that when I know more. But all right, our fundraiser,
we're still, this is our final episode, encouraging people to help us support
the P-Scores HIV and AIDS programs. Thank you so much for all the support we've gotten.
Look forward to supporting the men. We have a very exciting upcoming fundraiser that will start
February and March. But I'm going to leave everyone in suspense and we'll announce that next time.
Daniel, after the last two of you talked about where we talked about immunization of healthcare
workers, I got an angry email saying, how dare you think we don't know how to prevent getting
infection? But weren't the healthcare workers on the priority vaccination group and wouldn't you
want them to stay healthy so that they can keep working? You know, I think that's really interesting,
right? They know how to stay. Is it getting vaccinated the way and washing your hands?
You know, I have to say, it's really, it's really a shame. There's a large healthcare system
bias, you know, and it's made of a lot of different hospitals and each hospital has sort of a different
culture also to, I'll say, you know, and that healthcare system, what majority of the people
working there don't want to get vaccinated, which shocks me. I remember the time their flagship
hospital got scolded because nobody washes their hands. I mean, it's just like, come on. So yeah,
all right, send send us the angry emails. Remember, that's at peterhotes.com.
We have an email from Bhavna in Delhi, India, whose parents got COVID in November. And he's
concerned. His parents are doctors. They're going to get vaccinated AstraZeneca, but he's
concerned about his dad taking it so soon. I can't find any substantial data on how people who had
moderate to severe disease a few months ago react to the vaccine. So some advice for Bhavna.
Yeah, we talked about this a little bit last time and this goes into my never miss an opportunity
to immunize. So if your dad is the opportunity to get a vaccine, go ahead and get that vaccine
for your dad. The CDC recommends no minimal interval between the time you've been vaccinated,
and the time you've been infected, and when you get a vaccine. Now, I know some of my colleagues
say, Oh, you know, wait a few months. Do not miss the opportunity to vaccinate. We've now
vaccinated millions of people. Lots of them had COVID before I personally vaccinated,
you know, lots of people that had their fine. We are not seeing any signal to suggest that
people who have been infected before are going to end up having problems with the vaccine or do
have anymore. Last night, I vaccinated a gentleman who was on the ventilator for 55 days. He's now
better. When I vaccinated him, he cried tears of joy. He and his wife were just so relieved. This
was his second dose. And I said two weeks, keep yourselves two weeks, you're almost there.
Keep going. So yeah, particularly, Oh my gosh, people who've been sick before.
Let's get them vaccinated because you do not want to have a second infection.
And we're seeing the data. Yeah, you're you're unlikely to get infected in the first three months.
Your chance increases by six months. And as we go farther out, we're seeing people get
reinfected. Let's make sure we vaccinate these people. The CDC says there's no reason to wait.
I say there's no reason to wait. The science says there's no reason to wait.
David in the UK asks with a further trial showing advantage and survival for toselism map. Do you
think your clinical practice will change reading between the lines? It seems to be in combination
with steroids as you have long suggested. Yeah, I have to say, dude, my practice hasn't
necessarily changed. Interesting enough. I mean, we've we've talked about this early on sort of
our experience that you don't want to give it without steroids. You want to give it in a
background so that people have been on steroids. And if that person escalates to high flow nasal
cannula, they're heading towards the ICU, you think they're going to require intubation.
I think our experience and now the science is pretty clear that the right patient the right
time toselism map reduces people that require mechanical ventilation. It reduces your chance
of death actually with mortality benefits if used in the right patient with the right
background of steroids at the right time. But I have to say, it's really difficult. And we talked
about this on the ash guidelines meeting this week. A lot of people are suddenly sort of put
into positions of power and decision making that they were not used to that they did not
have before and maybe didn't have the experience for people that never sat on a guideline panel.
So they see guidelines and they say, no, no, these are the rules. We are really careful and we're
talking about when we publish our guidelines coming up that we're going to actually put in
a line where we say the qualification, we feel like people don't quite understand guidelines saying,
these are guidelines, but you should be caring for your patients based upon the most recent,
the most available, the most up-to-date data. So I had a painful conversation about a weekend
back. I ended up with a medical director at a hospital where I don't spend a lot of time and
either an endocrinologist, renal doc, I forget his specialty. And he was aware of some of the
latest head. He said, oh, we're aware of their stuff out there. We're going to probably meet next
month and discuss it. I really haven't taken the time to go through it, but I'm not going to
authorize Tostalizumev on this patient who actually laid it that day ended up ventilated in the ICU.
And so it's a little bit difficult. I have to say, from my perspective, as a specialist,
to see that a lot of institutions want one-size-fits-all and decisions are being made about patient
care, I think not really appreciating what is the latest data. If my family members in the hospital
and there's an expert in the field who's keeping up on the literature and making decisions,
that's quite a bit different than something being managed by an administrator.
Carson writes, is there any known correlation between a person's reaction to a vaccine and
the strength of that person's immune response to a person who gets vaccinated and has no side
effects be concerned that perhaps they didn't have a significant immune response?
I like that, right? Because we always, when the person has a warm arm and the seven-day
entry, say, oh, you're having a really strong, robust immune response, people respond really
well to these vaccines, whether or not they have any kind of local reactogenicity or not.
So no reason to check anything. These are vaccines with really high efficacy against
severe disease. Yeah, with that, whether or not you have a strong reaction, you should not be
concerned. All right, one more from Julia, who says, can you give us an update on Kawasaki-like
symptoms in children? I haven't heard much about it. Are we seeing it? Do we have any more information?
How are the affected kids six months out from infection? Yeah, so some of the nice things
that have developed over time here is that CDC has really provided good guidance, good links,
and actually, if people are concerned, we had a recent case where it was an adult with multi-inflammatory
syndrome, multi-inflammatory system, adult, so Miss A versus Miss C. And you can get on the phone,
you can reach out to the CDC. There aren't enough cases to say anything in general,
but some of these children have had cardiac issues, so they're being followed by cardiologists on a
regular basis. We're learning a lot. We still only have, as mentioned, about six months of data,
so we'll learn more. This is something we're still seeing, and unfortunately, there's a lot of cases
of COVID in children, and this is one of those, though not common. You start having a really
large population affected, and you start seeing more of these cases. All right, that is COVID-19
clinical update number 47 with Dr. Daniel Griffin. Thank you, Daniel. Oh, thank you so much,
and everybody, be safe.
