This week in virology, the podcast about viruses, the kind that make you sick.
From Microbe TV, this is Twiv, this week in virology, episode 716, recorded on February 4,
2021. I'm Vincent Rackeniello, and you're listening to the podcast all about viruses
joining me today from New York, Daniel Griffin. Hello, everyone. So Daniel,
January is over. You said it was going to be the worst January. Did that turn out to be true?
It certainly did. The only good thing is it is now over, and we have passed my favorite day of the
year, Groundhog Day. So it sort of means at least we could start looking forward to a better spring,
but it's been a horrible January. I sometimes feel like we're kind of US-centric, and in the US,
I feel like we've kind of crested or we are in the process of cresting a huge wave. The case
numbers, I think, are coming down after the holidays, but the deaths, we're seeing the deaths from
all those cases still. So still a lot of deaths. There's still a lot of patients in the hospital,
but I think we have better days ahead in the US, but I'm going to make sure I hit on this.
We can't forget about the rest of the world, because no one's safe until everyone's safe.
Let me start with a quotation we have a lot to do today, how very little can be done under the
spirit of fear, and that's Florence Nightingale. A couple things I really like, well, a very
inspirational woman who really advanced nursing, but a couple of things it brings, I think,
makes me think of. One is just how critical the nurses are in taking care of patients,
and how critical I think they are in the culture of medicine. They bring a real warmth and a caring
to patient care. And just this pointing out that people work better in a cooperative,
in a supportive, in a culture of generosity and kindness. And I think in a lot of ways over the
last year that has been forgotten, there's been a lot of rigidity and rules, and this is how we're
doing it. I know hospitals are struggling financially, but you can't lose sight of we're not there
primarily to make a dollar, we're there primarily to take care of people. And the almighty dollar
has to come second to a patient's life, patient's care. So, all right, we'll start off with the
pre-exposure period with my three rules that actually started to see these echoed a bit in
the media, which is great. Never miss an opportunity to vaccinate, never miss an opportunity to test
and never waste a precious vaccine dose. So, today I'm going to be talking about mutations,
vaccines, and some anticoagulation, very exciting anticoagulation updates. So, active vaccination,
in this realm, and it really, it goes into several of the different phases or stages of COVID-19,
but I'm going to try to talk a little bit about these in a context that makes sense for
clinicians. Like, what are we as clinicians? How do we understand this language and what is going
on here? So, I'm going to hit up some important highlights, but just a little background, right?
We are on Twiv. This is science heavy, and that is good. This is an RNA virus. So, there's going
to be changes to the genetic code being randomly introduced when this virus replicates. An infected
person has a large number of replicating virions. So, not every single virus in a person is exactly
the same. Sort of a quasi-species people talk about sometimes. I know in the world of HIV.
Now, I am going to oversimplify a little, but a change in the genetic code can be silent,
or they can actually result in a change in amino acids for which the protein is being coded.
I say this is simplified because RNA itself can have some functionality. So, as clinicians,
why do we care about mutations? We all enjoy science fiction, but why do we actually care
in our day-to-day? One is the specter that changed the genetic code of the virus. A mutation can
make the virus more transmissible. We want to give that just a little bit of context. It's not as
though the change in the genetic code makes the virus fly through the air more quickly. Nothing
like that. But maybe I think as Anthony Fauci said in his first, we'll call it, the Post-Trump
Giddy news conference, it could affect the ability of the virus to bind tightly to its target receptor
to the ACE2 receptor. So, it might be more transmissible in that it's easier for a smaller exposure
to result in an infection. It could potentially change the virulence. It could either make the
virus more or less virulent. And then as clinicians, a big one for us is, are these changes going to
impact our therapeutics or the immune response? So, is it going to affect, for instance, our drugs,
our monoclonal therapies, or our vaccines? So, just to give people a little bit of language here,
so the changes we care about are mutations or deletions. These are inevitable, right?
Variants are thus expected, but it's really the biologically significant changes that we care
about. So, for each variant of concern, we can ask this question about the genetic changes,
the mutations, the deletions, potentially even some additions, but we won't really go into that
today. But most of the changes, I'm going to, actually all the changes I'm going to talk about
today, are going to affect the biology of the spike protein, right? So, just a little bit
about the spike protein. I always try to use visuals to get people to think about this,
and sometimes my visuals are more of the cartoony, but the spike protein is a protein. It's made up
of amino acids, right? Amino acids come together and make a protein. This protein is 1,273 amino acids
long. In general, we'll say the Wuhan reference strain, but that spike protein is for clinicians
to really kind of put this in your mind in a terminology you can remember on the fly.
There's really two important parts of that spike protein that we're going to talk about.
The N-terminal domain, the NTD, it's not neglected tropical disease, and the receptor binding domain,
the RBD. I'm going to ignore some of the others just for simplicity because there's a lot of
complexity here. There's areas where this could be broken down, cleaved proteases, the rest,
but just for today, the NTD, the N-terminal domain, and the RBD. I want people to think
about this as the analogy of a hand, and we're going to get back into that, the hand and the arm.
But just some of the terminology, what are these crazy numbers and letters, right? I know we've
been told don't call it the UK strain. Don't call it the South African strain, so people have now
thrown in the numbers and said originally isolated in the UK. So I'm going to acknowledge that.
So as I mentioned, the spike protein is 1,273 amino acids long. Don't tune out. It's going to be
OK. You're going to make it through. This is critical stuff to know. And what are those numbers?
The numbers start with the N-terminal domain. That's where one is. And at the far right,
think of this in your head. That's going to be 1273. The deletions are going to be the same thing.
So when we hear a number, we're talking about a particular amino acid that has changed.
So when you talk about, I'm going to give some concrete examples. When you talk about an N
501Y, that means we're talking about a change, an amino acid 501, and the N has changed to a Y.
Well, what is an N? I mean, an N is a code. Help us, you know, use a one letter code for
our amino acid. So an N is an S-bar gene. A T is a tyrosine. And so the N goes to the Y.
I have to look those up. I'll be honest. But just let people kind of get a sense here. When you
hear an N 501Y, when you hear an E or 84K, that's 484. The E has changed to a K. So we'll talk a
little bit about this. If you hear deletion, deletion 69 test 70, that's going to mean those
amino acid 6970 were deleted, right? So a little trick here to help people just think,
because this is going to become a number soup going forward, right? Every one of those 1273
amino acids can change or be deleted. The N terminal domain that goes from about 14 to 306.
And the RBD, you could use the palm of my hand analogy, the RBD, the receptor body domain that
grabs onto spike is 330 to 528. So 331 to 528 to be exact. So anything that affects the palm of
the hand is going to affect the ability of the spike to grab its receptor. And I'm going to say
the NTD, think of that as affecting the back of the hand. It's not right in the binding pocket,
but it may affect the modality of the binding pocket. So hopefully this allows people to
get a little sense. So what are these numbers? What are these letters soup? So let's just talk a
little bit about each of the described strains. So today I'm going to talk briefly to where we're
going to go to other stuff about the B117 strain, originally described in the UK. The B135 strain
described originally in South Africa. The Cal-20C that we're seeing out in California and the B128
detected in Brazil, then Japan. Variants, Daniel, variants. And I call them variants or strains.
Variants. That's the variants of concern, remember?
So let's talk about that. This is great because clinicians, what variant versus strain? What is
the difference? And the difference, and this is why this is this weekend virology, and we have
Vincent chaperoning. A strain is when we have convincing biological activity change. A variant
is when we have a change in the genetic sequence, right? So calling something a strain requires a
higher bar. So the B117, I will use variant of concern here, originally described in the UK.
It has that D614G that we've been hearing about for a while. It's got a couple deletions,
and it has the N501Y, which is suggested to maybe allow that spike to bind better, right?
The B135 variant of concern, originally described in South Africa. This has that D614G also,
but it's also got the E484K. Now, why do we care about that as clinicians?
We care because there is some experimental evidence suggesting that that may affect our
monoclonal antibodies, a couple of them, so the BAM-lineva-mab and the IM-deva-mab.
There's also a K417N in this variant of concern that we are concerned may decrease the monoclonal
Casariva-mab efficacy, and this also has that N501Y, which we think may allow it to bind a
little bit better. Cal20C, that's got this L452R, which we also think decreases the efficacy of our
BAM-BAM, and also may be associated with decreased plasma effects. So maybe there's some
impact upon someone who's been previously infected, and I'm just going to mention the
Brazil one last, and then just kind of try to put this all together for people in a way that
they can think about it. So the B128 detected in Brazil, then Japan, that has the E484,
which we talked about, it has the N501Y. Now, just to put this in people's mind, you're going to
hear all these numbers. So one of the things you could do is when you hear the numbers say,
okay, is that somewhere in that 331 to 520? Is that affecting the palm of the hand? Might that
affect the ability of the spike protein to bind to the receptor? And if it does, this is a sweet
spot we think for neutralizing antibodies, so it may potentially impact some of our monoclonals.
But I do want to say this guy is not falling. As people may know, I mentioned several times,
I'm involved with Eli Lilly and helping get their monoclonal antibodies to folks and trials,
also with Regeneron as well. I guess the caveat with that, they don't give me any money, but
happier with that. Maybe it would be a conflict of interest if they did. But we follow these
because we are concerned, but the other side is they have a lot of monoclonal antibodies in the
pipeline. So ones that can cover these. So if you're in an area where you're concerned about
bamelinibimab efficacy, Eli Lilly has data as we talked about on a cocktail. There's also the
Regeneron cocktail. If you're concerned about the Regeneron cocktail the other way, and then there
are other monoclonal antibodies in the pipeline, so to speak. So I envision some point, Vincent
in the future, this will be on my board exam where they'll have these up there posted, and I'll
have to remember which one just like I have to with the HIV mutations and which drugs I can and
can't use. So I'm working on some kind of memory tricks, the Nervous Nelly 501Y. That was the one
in the UK. The EEC 484K, am I really worried about that affecting my monoclonal bamelinibimab
and imdabimab? That lousy 452, does that affect my bamelinibimab? The kite 417N, so that's the
k417N slash t, is that can affect Cassie? So I think as time goes by, we'll get a better sense of
where all these come out. But there was a really nice paper out of the David Holab,
increased resistance of SARS-CoV-2 variants, B1351 and B117 to antibody neutralization.
And a lot of things described here, you have to use more codvalescent plasma, about 11 or 33
fold increase for neutralization with codvalescent plasma, about a 6.5 to 8.6 fold increase in
vaccine sera. But from a clinical standpoint, I mentioned I don't think the sky is falling.
On a positive note, we have various monoclonals that are already FDA-UA, so emergency use
authorized out there that we can use. We have others in the pipeline waiting to go
hopefully quickly through the FDA if needed. And this is something I think that we can stay
ahead of. So I'm not concerned that the sky is falling. So if that decreases our number of
Twiv listeners, because I'm not saying the sky is falling and saying stay tuned for exciting news,
I just want to be honest and reassuring. As a clinician, I think that we have the tools and
the technology to stay ahead of these things. Do you have any comments, Vincent? Do you think
the sky is falling or does it seem reasonable? No, I don't. And we've talked about this a lot
on Twiv and I don't want to usurp you. Please usurp. I think that the benefit of this is having
you as well. So jump in. So originally, the B117 variant, which originated in the UK,
originally said, oh, it's 50% more transmissible. But you know what? Since then, it's gone to many
other places and it's not doing 50% more transmissible. So it's a lot more subtle. It's a lot more nuanced
than just transmission. And I like to think of it as these changes affecting fitness.
Fitness is the ability of a virus to get to a new host. And it doesn't just
involve going through the air. It involves the amount of virus shed by someone, the ability of
the virus to take hold in the host, maybe to evade immune responses, maybe to reproduce better.
So I think sometimes these changes give the virus a little edge and it takes off, but it's not
really transmitting better. It's just spreading and displacing another virus in the population.
So that whole idea doesn't bother me. I think a more realistic concern is the change are the
changes that can abrogate monoclonal effectiveness and vaccine effectiveness, as you've talked about.
Because if you do your masking and distancing and all that, it doesn't matter, except for the
antibody resolving an infection. So that's my take on this.
And I think I get questions and I don't know if this will be guitar to throw people out. Oh, my
gosh, with these new variants, do they hear they go right through the masks? No, I think a lot of
people's perception is when they say, oh, increased transmissibility or increased transmission,
they view it as almost like a bullet. And then someone cough their sneezes and these have somehow
changed their shape and can penetrate the fibers of your mask. And you now have to use keglar masks.
I mean, I think, you know, time will tell, right? I mean, you and I are being recorded.
So in March, right, people will go back to these episodes and sort of get a better sense.
Well, you know, the 117 variant is in many other countries. And in Scotland,
it hasn't taken off in California. It's been there since November.
It has not displaced the existing variants. So something else is going on.
It's not just about going through those droplets. That's what I want people to understand.
Yeah, it's complicated. But I think the great thing is we have the science and the scientists
who are on top of this. And so we're going to get out of this. We are not going to have
another January like we just had, but Nick five. So in the Lancet, we got safety and efficacy of an
R add 26 and an R add five vector based heterologous prime boost COVID-19 vaccine.
An interim analysis of randomized controlled phase three trial in Russia.
So these were the results that we were waiting for randomized double blind placebo controlled
phase three trial in 25 hospitals and polyclinics in Moscow, Russia.
And so this vaccine group and of one of 16,501 placebo group was smaller 5,476.
And then the numbers don't quite add up because they say 19,866 received two doses
of vaccine or placebo. So there was a little bit of a you lose a few folks there between
the whole trial and everyone getting that boost. But from 21 days, and this was interesting,
from 21 days after the first dose. So that basically started counting the day people came in for
their second dose or booster. They saw that 0.1% of the vaccinated got COVID-19. 1.3% in the placebo
group, right? These are small numbers, but that gives us an efficacy about 91.6. And they've got
another one of these. These will be the curves that I've heard are now on T-shirts, immunity works.
We show the placebo group in red and just the number of confirmed COVID-19 just keeps going,
keeps going where the vaccine it goes up. And then once they've reached a level of protection,
it sort of levels out and stays pretty flat for a while. With the data here, they have actually
mentioned that they're going to do a single dose trial, which will be interesting as well.
And it's been some discussion on the main this weekend virology about some of the other data.
So more exciting news on vaccines. But let me hit a bunch of Q&A questions and answers on vaccines.
This is actually, I spend a lot of my time talking to a new Julie, my partner today,
and she's saying, what are we going to do when COVID is over? Because we spend so much of our time
addressing COVID-related questions and vaccine questions. So if the vaccine still allow
for milder symptomatic COVID mainly prevents severe COVID, what about getting a mild case
and the risk of developing long COVID? So that's an interesting question. Just to be honest,
we do not know. But this is a very interesting question. If a person has been vaccinated,
they go ahead and get a mild case of COVID. We are hoping they're less likely to develop the
long COVID, but we still don't know. And actually, this is a pretty important question, I would say.
As I get into some of the other questions, I will say I'm optimistic about this.
It looks like when people do get infected, the limited data we have that they end up with milder
symptoms, they end up with a shorter course, they end up with a shorter period of time that
they're actually shedding the virus. Or I should say that their RNA PCR positive, they also end up
at much lower, usually about two logs lower. So I'm optimistic, but yeah, I think that this is a
question that we'll keep our eye on. It sort of goes right into this next one. Any more information
on vaccinated people being less able to transmit the virus, right? This gets back to sort of Dixon's
idea that he doesn't want a healthcare worker coming and taking care of him, who's not vaccinated
because now they're more likely to give him the virus. So I always like to use scenarios,
and I get a lot of questions here about scenarios. So we have some adults, right? Over the age of 75,
they're about to get their second dose. And they're already starting to ask, well, now that I have
my second dose, what can I do? Can I go visit my friends in Florida? They've also been vaccinated.
Can I fly to go visit my adult children? What about all the other activities? So
just want to bring up some more data we have here. So analysis of PCR positive swabs in the UK
population, right? Suggesting that the vaccine may reduce transmission, but we'll get a little bit
farther into that because I want to hit on some really sort of specific scenarios. Anything new
about people who previously had COVID getting vaccinated, right? And Peter Hotez weighed in on
this, but there's some research. We've got some papers out. Robust spike antibody one responses
and increased reactogenicity in seropositive individuals after a single dose of SARS-CoV-2 mRNA
vaccine. This was out of Mount Sinai. And they actually found, and this is something I think
we're starting to see, and now it's nice to have it quantified, they found that getting that first
vaccine dose in someone who had COVID before was very similar to that second dose in folks who
did not have COVID before. So similar reactogenicity profile, but also what looks like a similar
boost in the antibody levels. What we don't know, and we're not going to know quite yet, right,
is what's the durability? What are the kinetics of those antibody responses? The other paper,
single dose vaccination in healthcare workers previously infected with SARS-CoV-2. This is out
of University of Maryland. And they really, really found about the same thing. It looked like
that one dose of the mRNA vaccine was giving these elevated antibody titers, similar to sort of the
boost we would expect from a second. So we're not encouraging people at this point to only get
one shot. We may actually end up at some point having people get even a third shot. Who knows?
But this is interesting stuff and is helpful. We're learning more. And I think it does feed to
boy, if you've had COVID before that first shot, maybe a bit of a doozy, maybe what most people
are getting the second time. I don't know why I still get this question, but is it a good idea to
keep millions of vaccine doses in the freezers to make sure that second dose is given right on
schedule? Well, unfortunately, I think everyone is aware that millions of doses of vaccines are
sitting in freezers and not getting into people's arms here in the US. And despite requests by the
White House, by Andy Slavitt, to those vaccines in arms, many large hospital systems have freezers
full of doses. Oddly enough, some rules only allow for vaccines to go to sites that have the ability
to have those freezers. In my world, you wouldn't be allowed to have vaccines if you had a freezer
that could hang on to them for more than those 30 days. Now, the CDC has updated their guidance on
COVID mRNA vaccine interim dosing to include a grace period. So you can get it four days earlier
than the three or four weeks. And then they serve statement, then out to six weeks, if it is not
feasible to adhere to the recommended interval. So they, they'll give the qualified statement
just to quote right off. CDC is not advocating for people to delay getting their second dose.
But the data from clinical trial supports this range of either four days early or out to six weeks
if you need to. So my answer really is in line with the Biden COVID task force that no, it is not
a good idea to remove two fifths of the available vaccine doses from potentially giving those people
freeze them away just because you want to hedge and are worried that there might be a slight
delay of a few in the order of days of getting the second vaccine doses into patients. So
I think people have probably heard how we've approached this at pro health. When we get our
vaccines, we put them 100% of those and up in arms as soon as possible. So if everyone would do that,
I think that this would go much quicker. Is the supply now flowing from Moderna and Pfizer or
is it jerky? The supply is flowing. We're getting 200,000 doses a week to New York.
Some of the states have to say like our riverside partners, you know, every every week they get a
consistent supply because there it's going directly to our to our clinics where we're giving everyone
the vaccines. In New York, there's still this hub model where every week you put in as a provider,
you know, we would like this many to this many sites. And even though there's a constant flow
to the state, that flow is still going to large hospital systems, healthcare systems with lots of
freezers. Every time one dose is given, another stuck in the freezer for, you know, three or four
weeks later. So yeah, it's flowing. Moderna actually increased by 33%. The amount of vaccine it's
sending out, Pfizer is increasing their production. So, you know, the government and the pharmaceutical
companies have made it clear there is this is flowing. You know, and if somebody gets their
dose delayed by a few days, that's not as much of an issue as, you know, millions of people
not getting any vaccine at all here. And I guess this we're tying into the if a second dose of a
two dose vaccine is delayed, will it be less protective? Right? Because people, I think there's two
two things here. One is person is watching the clock. I want to get that second dose so I can
then count the clock to when I'm, you know, at that 100% protection from severe disease. But
there's also that concern too, is if it's delayed by a period of time, will that mean that it's less
protective? So we are starting to get some data on that. And we had recent data from AstraZeneca
with actually interesting up demonstrated improved efficacy with longer intervals between doses
with higher antibodies and a broader antibody response with a boost given at 12 weeks,
rather than six weeks, vaccine efficacy rising from 54.9% with an interval of less than six weeks
to 82.4% when spent when spaced 12 or more weeks apart. So we still recommended hearing to the
studied intervals. But you know, this understanding of immunology. Now we're getting data really
goes along with what we've learned over many years with vaccine research. So certainly there's a
critical minimal interval before the boost to allow the effector cells to mature into memory cells.
But a slightly longer interval may be associated with a higher and broader boost of antibodies.
And I don't know if we know enough yet as far as T cell responses, whether or not they're
enhanced. But I think our basic understanding of immunology would suggest most of the benefit
here if you stretch that out a little is going to be antibodies, but definitely not a diminution.
Now that I have been vaccinated, can I do the following? So the science is developing here.
But let me run through a few scenarios and want to be careful not to get above the science,
but also to to be reasonable in what we say. So I'm using my parents as an example. My parents
will soon have reached two weeks past their second vaccination. Yesterday my wife helped my mother
get to her second vaccination. My dad pretty much can do it all by himself. So the two of them went.
And my mother reported a penicillin allergy. So they made her wait for a prolonged period of
time because I don't know why, but Rachel was not very crowded. I think they said in the entire
time they were there getting vaccinated for people got vaccinated. They were too. There were two others.
But my dad wants to start going back to the office. So what was my advice? My mother's. He can't go
to the office. He's going to get COVID. He's going to bring it home to me. So we had a couple
conversations. One is, as I said to my dad, dad, you have not gone to the office in a year. You
in two weeks will be protected. I do not have a problem with you going back to the office.
Will he wear a mask? Will he will he be careful? Yes. And my worried he's going to bring it home
and my mother will get COVID and die again? No. My mother has also been vaccinated. So
let's I think I can answer very clearly here. Two older individuals both over the age of 80.
Sorry about that, mom. You look younger and dad, you definitely look younger too. I have no problem
as a son, as a physician, being okay with them going back to with my dad going back to the office.
Now my mom wants us to come over the house for Sunday dinner indoors after she's been
vaccinated for two weeks. Is that all right? Now this is a tough thing. And this gets into what
does the science tell us? Are we underselling? Are we overselling the vaccine? My mother
will have reached her two weeks past the second dose. My father will reach this two weeks past
the second dose. Is it okay for my wife and I? And my oldest daughter will be off of college,
but for my other daughter and Barnaby, Eloise and Barnaby to go over for Sunday dinner. We haven't
had indoor dinner with them in a long time. Is it okay for the five of us to eat indoors?
I'm going to say I think it's okay. I mean, I worry about my mom. I worry about my dad,
but they've now been fully vaccinated. My dad's going to and from work, and that's it. He's,
you know, he and my mom are not suddenly socializing with big maskless parties. I'm sure it'll be
just the two of them watching the Super Bowl this weekend. So yeah, I think it's okay. Until they
reach that point, though, I do not go into their house without a mask. And even if I do go in with
the mask, I stay for limited periods of time. Now my in-laws, when they are fully vaccinated,
they want to start flying around the country, right? They've been, they've been up in Cape
Cods, you know, being really careful, staying by themselves. They want to start, they want to fly
down to Florida. They want to see their vaccinated friends there. They want to fly out to Utah to
see their, their daughter is that safe for them. Yes. And I actually think if they're flying down to
Florida, if they're staying at a hotel and they're going to be outdoors with friends in Florida,
I actually, I see really minimal risk. I see that being a reasonable risk taking activity.
When they go out to see their daughter in, in Utah, we are hoping that the data will pan out. I expect
the data to pan out that people who are vaccinated are less likely to transmit to others, but we're
still waiting on the science on that. So that then is going to be, you know, is it, is it a risk for
the daughter? Is it a risk for the daughter's boyfriend? Daughter has a boyfriend? Is it a risk
for the malamute that they have the dog? But for the vaccinated parents by vaccinated in-laws,
they're actually going to be much safer. Passive vaccination. We just talked a little bit about
the monoclonal. So the, the Eli Lilly product, the Regeneron cocktail, the Eli Lilly cocktail in the
past, monoclonal are still being underutilized. But as I mentioned, they're ready to go. They're
here to meet the challenge of any changes in the genetic code of the virus. All right. So now
this is the bulk, as though we haven't already done the bulk, lots on anticoagulation this week.
So I don't want to keep this too long, but let's hit this. This is really critical because now we
have new information that is actually changing some of the decisions that I'm making and some of
the recommendations I'm making in the hospital. So based on the interim results of more than a
thousand patients admitted to the hospital, findings from three large randomized control trials showed
that full doses of blood thinners, in addition to being safe, were superior to the doses
normally given to prevent blood clots in hospitalized patients with moderately severe COVID-19. So
these trials complement the findings announced in December that the routine use of full dose
anticoagulation when started in the ICU in critically ill COVID-19 patients was not beneficial and
may be harmful. So just to break this down before I go through the weeds, your critically ill patient
in the ICU with lots of lines, severely ill, the evidence that we have to date is favoring
prophylactic dosing. It doesn't really necessarily go along with what we were thinking, but your
floor patient who's maybe laying there in bed who's on oxygen, they actually are at lower risk of
bleeding and they actually do better with full dose anticoagulation. So how does this fit in with
our guidelines and how do we move forward and what are the actual studies? So the current guidelines
from the American Society of Humanology are the ash guideline panel suggests using these were made
a while back prophylactic intensity over intermediate or therapeutic intensity anticoagulation in
patients with COVID-19 related acute illness who do not have suspected or confirmed VTE.
And then we mentioned this is a conditional recommendation based on very low certainty
in the evidence about effects. And then added to this, the panel acknowledges that higher
intensity anticoagulation may be preferred in patients judged to be at high thrombotic risk
and low risk of bleeding. And then we actually add the interim data from these studies will
eventually be available in peer reviewed articles, but right now let me run through all the data
here. So the three clinical trial platforms spanned five continents, more than 300 hospitals
together were able to test whether there was a greater benefit of full doses of blood thinners
to moderately ill hospitalized patients with COVID-19 compared to the lower dose typically
administered to prevent blood clots in hospitalized patients. So let's go through the studies.
We have the ATT ACC. This is the anti-thrombotics inpatient and anti-thrombotic therapy
to emulate complications of COVID-19 with 58 sites in Canada, the US, Brazil and Mexico.
We have active for a therapeutic anticoagulation accelerating COVID-19 therapeutic interventions
and vaccines for, and this was 60 sites in USA in Spain. And we have RamCap,
randomized embedded multi-factorial adaptive platform trial for community acquired pneumonia,
209 sites, 290 sites. So this is very robust in Canada, the USA, UK, Ireland, EU, Saudi Arabia,
Australia, New Zealand, Nepal, India, Pakistan. And this, I have to say this is impressive.
There was a collaboration between all these studies and they agreed to create a multi-platform
randomized controlled trials with harmonized protocols. So they all agreed to use common
primary, common secondary and safety outcomes, and also to have common combined prospective
superiority and futility rules. So all the enrollees in all sites had to have signed in symptoms
consistent with COVID-19. So this is all symptomatic COVID-19. And then they were randomized within
72 hours of admission. And the primary outcome was organ support free days. And then they had
several key secondary outcomes. So from the safety, they were looking at major bleeding.
From efficacy, they were looking at mortality, intubation, major thrombosis, stroke,
am I, length of stay in the ICU and hospital. And then this is critical because I'm going
to get back to this. They risk stratified. They thought they were risk stratifying people based
upon the D dimer level. So you looked at people with D dimers that were low, less than two times
the upper limb abnormal. And then they looked at people that had elevated D dimer, so greater
than two times the upper limb abnormal. The reason I want to point this out right here is that this
did not impact the recommendations. And I'm going to have to say this several times because people,
it's very hard to get away from this. We as clinicians, we love to measure stuff. We love to have
something objective to guide us. We think of D dimer as an indication of people developing
thrombotic complication. And I just want to point out here, whether the D dimer was low or high,
the recommendations still stand. And when you put all this together, the primary outcome
of organ free support days favored full dose anticoagulation for moderate COVID-19.
As far as secondary outcomes, mortality was lower with full dose anticoagulation for moderate
COVID-19. Major bleeding was seen with full dose anticoagulation, but was less than 2%.
Thrombotic events were less common with full dose anticoagulation. But to recap the other side,
persevere COVID-19, those patients requiring ICU level support. The probability that routine use
of therapeutic anticoagulation was inferior was 98.5%, mainly you were seeing major bleeding
complications of 3.7% in the ICU patients, which really sort of backfired against us with that
full dose anticoagulation. So your floor patients, the science currently suggests full dose.
But if you're in the ICU, you want to watch the bleeding complications. I know we're going to
probably getting near our limit here, but I sort of want to make sure I discuss guidelines and what
they are, because we had a lot of conversation about this the last time at the Ash guideline
meeting. And what we were discussing is we, unfortunately, people have not really understood
what guidelines were. And guidelines have changed in the time of COVID. And I think a lot of people
have been promoted to positions of responsibility with their force to make these decisions,
but they themselves never served on a guideline committee before. Maybe they never helped construct
guidelines, but now they're sort of putting these in place. And so we talked a little bit
about how this was a challenge. So we've already added language, actually, to the Ash website,
trying to clarify what a guideline is and how is it expected to be used. These are not rigid
rules for patient care. And we do sort of encourage people to individualize their management decisions
to tailor them to a specific patient. And we've added an individualized assessment of the patient's
risk of thrombosis and bleeding is important when deciding on anticoagulation intensity.
Clinicians should weigh the potential benefits and harms based on the most up-to-date available
evidence in caring for their patients. So we're trying to communicate that these are
only guidelines. They're established to help direct physicians to deliver the best care
for their patients. And even though these are living documents updated on a regular basis,
by their very nature, they will not be the most up-to-date based upon available evidence.
So I'm just going to hit three sort of scenario cases, examples. Case one, just sort of what would
we do. This is a police officer in his 40s. His oxygen saturation is 88% on room air. He has no
significant medical problems. He's standing up. He's looking out the window. When can I go?
He's being treated with remdesivir and steroids. That's an individual I still might stick with
just prophylactic dosing, right? He's ambulating. He's low-risk. Case two, we have an OB, 75-year-old
man. He's somulin. He's on six liters nasal cannula. He has coronary artery disease, CHF and diabetes.
That's a man. Now I'm going to recommend full dose anticoagulation. Case three, a woman. She's an
ICU. She's intubated. She's prone. She has low ematocrit. She's on medications to maintain her blood
pressure called pressers. She has staphorus, bacteria, multiple IVs. She's got a central line.
This is a woman that I'm going to recommend prophylactic dose anticoagulation. So I'm going
to sort of make sure I just mentioned the tail phase, but then I'm going to update people on
our fundraiser. So as we move into our fundraiser, I'm going to use an analogy from my honorary cousin,
Peter Dates, about oxygen masks and airplanes. And you know how they always tell you like when
those oxygen masks come down, put them on yourself first. But then the point I'm going to say here
is once you have that mask on you, make sure that you put that mask on other people. So
throughout the months of February and March, we're going to be making donations to the ASTM
and NH. So donations made to parasites of that borders will be matched and doubled by TWB,
PWB, and donated to the American Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene. And this money
is going to include scholarships for women from low-income parts of the world to travel to the
annual meeting. So we're going to pledge a, hopefully we're going to get up to a maximum 40,000, but
we are going to donate a minimum of $20,000. And part of that is going to go for these
scholarship travel awards to basically prioritize females from low-income countries,
who otherwise might not be able to attend. So it goes back to where I started. We are not safe
until everyone is safe. We're seeing vaccines roll out here in the United States that all may
be exciting, but we're not safe until everyone's safe. Let's not forget about the rest of the world.
A couple of email for Daniel. If you want to send in a question, Daniel at microbe.tv,
the first is from Debbie, who wants to advise a friend on setting daughters back to school in
Maryland, where they're living in an underfunded school district, has an incredible plan to bring
students back, small cohorts, air filters, distancing dividers at desks, etc. But she says the only
thing that's missing is testing. I thought nothing is perfect, but air quality, cohorting,
and testing were what I thought of as deal breakers, your thoughts.
Yeah, you know, this continues to be, you know, a really frustrating challenge is that people
leave testing out. I mean, all these other things cost money too, right? You start smaller class
sizes, you start doing all these mitigation strategies, and then they leave testing out.
So one of the things, Debbie, I'm going to suggest you do, let's see where you are. You're in
Maryland. What I'm going to say is reach out to one of the local provider groups in the area,
because a lot of times we've done this at Pro Health New York. We've done this at Riverside.
We've created the whole Let's Get Back program is, you know, sometimes the schools just leave
this out for some reason. And if they do, there's no reason why parents and teachers organizations
can't jump in and we can't create something. In my local town, it's actually one of our
Pro Health providers has been working with the school. And it took a long time that they finally
introduced testing. And testing is really, I think, part of creating the best possible solution.
President Biden has said he really wants to get the teachers back. He really wants to get the
kids back and in person. That's fine and all, but we've got to make sure we do everything to make
it safe. So this is a safe decision. And I think testing is part of that.
Terry in Orlando has a 100 year old mom who got her first dose and is preparing for the second.
And Terry wants to know, is there anything that we should do to prepare her? And how long should
someone stay with her afterwards to monitor her?
Yeah. So, you know, the nice thing about older individuals that I know this was discussed on
the last wave, is they either have less side effects, or they just complain less than young
people, right? Young people are so horrible. I had to take pain medications. No, I think your
healthy 100 year old mom is actually going to do very well. The observation period we recommend
is really 15 minutes after the vaccination. No one really needs to stay with your mom. It would be
nice if you stayed with your mom. But again, you want to weigh, you know, are you vaccinated? Is
there a risk of exposure? But she's getting so close to being out the other side of this.
You know, ask her doctor whether it's safe at a 100 year old woman with whatever medical
problem she has to use something like ibuprofen or a leave or Tylenol. But no, I think that there's
nothing too much that I would worry about here. And she has one more question. Her daughter
is breastfeeding. Her 10 month old grandson, is there any chance if she is still breastfeeding when
she is vaccinated that any protection will reach the grandson? And how far down the road do you think
will be the earliest we expect one year olds to be vaccinated? Yeah, so breastfeeding. And I think
I posted my friend Vanessa, one of my coworkers who she is breastfeeding mother who is vaccinated.
That's one of the things like breast vaccinating a breastfeeding woman is really vaccinating two
people. We anticipate and this has been true for all our other vaccines that when a woman starts
making antibodies, those antibodies are then in the breast milk. So if she is vaccinated,
once she starts making those robust levels of antibodies, we anticipate that those are being
then transmitted to the 10 month old grandson. There are some trials looking at younger individuals.
It's probably going to be a while before we look at one year olds. I know there was a question
about, okay, so if you have, if you say this is allowable for this, are you allowed to stretch
beyond that? So for instance, I'll say that J and J vaccines been given hundreds of thousands
of individuals. You know, will it, will it be okay to give those to children? Unfortunately,
it may be quite a while before we have any science to guide this. So there may be judgment calls at
some point. All right, one more from Carson. You've said that people who recently had COVID
should still get vaccinated, but also that anyone who's had monoclonal therapy needs to wait 90 days
because the monoclonals could prevent the person from mounting a sufficient immune response to the
vaccine. Why isn't that the case for someone who's been infected and presumably develop their own
antibodies? Yeah, no, this is this is an excellent question, right? And I'm going to bring two things.
So I had a conversation with my partner, Nujali earlier today, a conversation with Fatima Johari,
one of the the infectious disease doctors I work with at Plainview about sort of these two topics.
And one was it was a husband and wife, and the husband had been vaccinated. And he's
well, got just like so many, he got infected before his second second vaccine dose. And
you know, he meets criteria for monoclonal antibodies, but he doesn't want to get the monoclonal antibodies
because as he explained, it was so hard to get the appointments for the vaccine. If I missed this,
I'll never get another one. And you know, try to explain that if he gets the monoclonals,
we have we have the impression and actually the evidence that those are going to be in his system
for 90 days. So in a sense, instead of waiting for that second dose and another two weeks for the
antibodies, so three weeks from now, you know, within an hour, he could instantly have that
passive immunity that lasts three months at the end of those three months, then he can go ahead
and get his vaccine and get that boost. But what about this? This is this issue. What about someone
who's already had an infection? Why not just wait three months just like you did with anybody
therapies? And you'll hear different advice on this. This for me gets back to that rule,
never miss an opportunity to vaccinate. If someone is ready and willing right now to get vaccinated,
and you can give them that protection, which we have well studied, which we're familiar with,
which we are learning more and more about the durability. And all the science suggests that it
is even better than natural infection. That's why I'm saying there's no need to wait. Three months,
maybe that person's lost interest and they decide they don't want to get vaccinated. So you've just
lost the opportunity to immunize. And for us all to get out of this, for us to see the death count
drop, we want to see as many people vaccinated as possible.
That is COVID-19 clinical update number 48 with Dr. Daniel Griffin. Thanks again, Daniel.
Oh, my pleasure. Everyone be safe.
