This week in virology, the podcast about viruses, the kind that make you sick.
From Microbe TV, this is Twiv, this week in virology, episode 719 recorded on February 11,
2021. I'm Vincent Racken Yello, and you're listening to the podcast all about viruses.
Joining me today from New York, Daniel Griffin. Hello, everyone. All right, we're a week later.
Is it any better, Daniel? You know, I am going to say yes. I'm going to say I'm
apparently I'm going to be on the news tonight at 7.30, after we finish Twiv. And I am going to say
then, you know, this will be dropped Saturday. So people won't know that I'm going to say
that we've really come over our crest. I mean, we were looking at over 300,000 new cases a day.
We crested over 5,000 deaths per day. And now we've dropped down to less than 200,000 cases
per day. And our deaths are actually getting down in the 2000s again, which is, you know,
horrible to say that that's better than where we were. And what's the reason for this downturn,
do we know? I think there's several things going on, Vincent. I think one of them is that,
you know, if you become infected, when you're infecting 300,000 people a day, you're taking
300,000 people who are probably not going to get reinfected in the next three or four months or so.
We're also ramping up vaccines, you know, over a million people are being vaccinated a day.
The other thing is we got past Christmas, New Year's, we got past all those big holiday times. So,
you know, and I understand it was a really bad Super Bowl. So hopefully we won't see much of a
surge after that. Okay, we've got a lot to cover today. And actually, I'm going to say
exciting new news, hot off the press we'll talk about today. But let me start off with my quotation.
And this is a quotation from the Great Gatsby by F Scott Fitzgerald, one of my favorite books.
People may not know, but I live in East Ag and I look across at West Ag where Gatsby was when he
Gatsby believed in the green light, the orgasmic future that year by year recedes before us.
It eluded us then, but that's no matter. Tomorrow we will run faster, stretch out our arms farther,
and then one fine morning. So we beat on boats against the current, born ceaselessly into the past,
born back ceaselessly into the past. So all right, never miss an opportunity to vaccinate,
never miss an opportunity to test, never waste a vaccine dose. I hope everyone survived last
week's discussion of the variants. And yes, it was simplified. I left out the trimmers and
fear and cleavage sites and pre and post fusion confirmation changes. But my hope is that this
primer will help as we go forward. You know, I was thinking today, as I went in and one of my
patients had not made it through the night, how lucky we were when we talked about the Irish
patient that we got to follow his drama through not knowing how it was going to go and then see
him end up back home in Colorado. But unfortunately, that is not the outcome that all my patients
are experiencing. All right, the pre exposure period. So my stages paper is now published. It's
out there. I don't know if the full it's going to be open access to the full paper will be available
soon. But we're going to stick with these stages, the pre exposure period. So now two masks at a
time are being recommended or discussed by the CDC. In the MMWR, there was maximizing fit for
cloth and medical procedure mass to improve performance and reduce SARS-CoV-2 transmission
and exposure 2021 in the MMWR. Testing, I want to say I have growing concerns about the reduction
in testing. I was looking at the COVID tracking project and they had reported that if there was
a significant drop in testing, I was able to confirm this in other sources. On January 18th,
the seven day average of daily new tests reached an all time high of over 2 million. Just to kind
of give people perspective, January 18th, one slash 20 was the Biden inauguration. That number
has now fallen well below that 2 million number. And that 2 million number is actually what our
public health experts consider an important threshold for allowing us to identify most of
the people with symptoms really to prevent them from spreading it to other individuals.
You know, in New York here locally, the 15th of January is when we reached our peak with 324,671
tests done in a single day. We're now seeing half that number, less than 200,000
really about 150,000 done per day. So we're really dropping. It was about a year ago that Michael
Mina started championing the idea of the home saliva, rapid saliva test, the liquor sticks,
a dollar or less. He was a guest on Twiv back in 640, Twiv 640 back in July.
Now there are several at home collection COVID tests. Most of them are male back offs. They're not
really doing the full thing. But back in December, a loom. This is an Australian based company
received an EUA for their 15 minute rapid in home antigen test. And recently, the White House
announced that the Department of Defense has committed $230.8 million to help a loom increase
its production of these at home tests. As per the loom CEO, Sean Parsons, we certainly would
like to see this priced in the $30 range. But he admits it will definitely start at more than
that $30 per test. That's a lot of money. So really not quite where I would like to see it be.
Active vaccination, I'm going to call this the good, the bad and the ugly. The ugly is all the
equity with access. The bad as we've really created a system that made access to vaccination,
very complicated, frustrating. And by its very nature, easier for wealthy, healthy and more
educated to access. The good though is that it does look like this is about to turn around
and improve at least for the US. I'm hoping the rest of the world after that. But the CDC has a
COVID-19 vaccine data tracker. And actually, we're really seeing the number ramp up of vaccines
per day. It's over a million per day. Here in New York, we are below average. We're bottom
dwellers. We're in the bottom half. Alaska is doing the best. Nevada is doing the worst.
Based upon percent of doses received and then being administered, we have places like North
Dakota, where 95% of the doses end up administered. In New York, we're down. Only about 70% of the
doses delivered are administered, about 30% of them. So about a third of them end up sitting in
freezers. But we expect this to turn around soon. Just give people, you know, it is February on the
26th, J&J is going to be going for EUA. And we are hoping that by April, the supply outstrips
demand. Moderna has ramped up its production and deliveries. Pfizer has reported a doubling of
its production per month by having its production time through increased efficiencies. A nice
story about that USA today this last week. I do want to share some concerning developments if
people are not watching what's happening down in Manasse, Brazil. And this was a situation where
the first wave of the virus ran rampant. Really, there was a decision made. And what ended up
happening was it ran through. About 5% or 6% of the population died. It was mostly the older,
the more vulnerable. By October 2020, there's a nice Lancet article on this called resurgence
of COVID-19 in the NOSF Brazil, despite high seroprevalence. And as they report in the Lancet,
by October 2020, 76% of the population that was still alive was deemed infected, previously
infected based on serological testing. But now we're seeing an increase. We're seeing a second wave.
This time, the hospitalization rate is 2.5 times what we saw with the first wave. We're seeing a
20% higher per day mortality than happened the first time. And the surge is so large that hospitals
have run out of oxygen. And patients on ventilators who need extraction debris are literally suffocating
in hospital beds. So not much of an endorsement for this, you know, Great Barrington. Let's try
to achieve herd immunity with natural infection. I'm going to get to the next question. Still in
the vaccine section, does vaccination impact transmission? And we just this week, there was
an update from the CDC where they actually do couch this. So I will comment, but they say vaccinated
persons with an exposure to someone with suspected or confirmed COVID-19 are not required to quarantine
if they meet the following criteria, right? So this is a change. If they're fully vaccinated,
so they passed two weeks following the receipt of that second dose in a two dose series. But they're
also kind of getting ready. They're saying we're greater than two weeks following receipt of one
dose of a single dose vaccine. I think they're thinking J and J might get approved. They're within
three months of the receipt of the last dose in the series. And they're remaining asymptomatic.
And that's up on the CDC website. And they actually they they catch this and they explain they say,
okay, although the risk of SARS-CoV-2 transmission from vaccinated persons to others is still uncertain,
vaccination has been demonstrated to prevent symptomatic COVID-19.
Symptomatic and pre-symptomatic transmission is thought to have a greater role in transmission
than purely a symptomatic transmission. And additionally, individual and societal benefits
of avoiding unnecessary quarantine may outweigh the potential but unknown risk of transmission
and facilitate the direction of public health resources to persons at highest risk
for transmitting SARS-CoV-2 to others. So this is a bit of a change. This is a bit of an update.
I kept hearing about transmission evidence out of Israel. And on the 8th, the paper,
initial real world evidence for lower viral load of individuals who have been vaccinated by
BNT162b2 became available on GitHub. So two things. Well, the BNT162b2, that's the Pfizer vaccine.
And what is GitHub? This is actually interesting. This was a website originally set up for developers
and companies to share and maintain software. I actually used it when I was writing one of our
textbooks. It's sort of a way to share files, but sort of interesting. Another way for things to
just get out there. And what they reported here, and I don't want to spend too much time on this,
because they report that there was a drop in the average CT values when they looked at people
over a certain age with a 75% vaccination penetrance versus people at a lower age with a lower vaccination
penetrance. But they actually should have, I think, called this statistically significant,
because what they really came out to was instead of about a 26.5, they were seeing CT values of
about 27.5. So only one CT value difference. So instead of an average RNA copy number of
800,000, they're seeing an RNA copy number of 400,000 on average. So still in a level where
we think there's transmission. So I think this is a complicated issue, or we'll learn more about it.
All right, still in this pre-exposure period, we continue to recommend that people exercise,
no reason to go into a COVID exposure vitamin deficient. There actually was a paper in the
Lancet, Diabetes and Endocrinology, entitled Vitamin D and COVID-19, Why the Controversy.
And I guess I'm all along lines with this. I don't think anyone is going to propose that we do a
study where you have half the group vitamin D deficient and the other replete. I think across
the board, there is no reason to be vitamin D deficient. So I think that that can just be closed. Take
your vitamin D, don't be vitamin D deficient, exercise, don't put on extra pounds, those pandemic
pounds, be careful, try to be as healthy as you can. Passive vaccination. This was exciting,
another exciting week. Lily's bamlinibamab, administered with atessa bamab, received FDA
EUA for COVID-19. So this is now Eli Lilly has a cocktail as well, and it gets even more exciting.
If you give just bamlinibamab, instead of an hour, you can infuse it over 16 minutes. If you do the
cocktail, 21 minutes. So this is really going to improve access. As a treatment reminder,
it's really critical that you get this in during the first seven to 10 days was another study
out there where really if you give if you give monoclonal's late, if you wait till someone's
already, you know, in the ICU till it's late in that second week, if you miss that front window,
you don't do anyone any help. We've been actually infusing a lot of people through the united
in research study. And this has been great to give people access to monoclonal therapy in the
comfort of their own home through infusions. We get into our early inflammatory phase,
and maybe just as a reminder, still remdesivir still being used in hospitalized patients with
oxygen saturations less than 94%. A little broader with regard to not limiting it based upon renal
function steroids. Again, second week oxygen saturations less than 94. We discussed last time
updated data on anticoagulation. A number of studies that were showing that in ICU, critically ill
patients that prophylactic dosing anticoagulation was associated with the best outcomes. But in
your moderately ill floor patients, that full dose anticoagulation was associated with the best outcomes.
But some exciting new news on tocelism map. I've been waiting for this for quite a while,
actually. And this is the recovery data. So just put on a preprint tocelism map in patients admitted
to hospital with COVID-19 recovery trial, preliminary results of a randomized controlled open label
platform trial. This is a preprint. But I got a chance to look through this. This study looked
at over 4000 adults, and the patients were allocated to receive tocelism map either as a single dose
or a second dose. And actually, there's a weight based adjustment. So as high as 800 milligrams,
or down to 400 milligrams based upon various weights, you can look up and, you know,
find the dose for your patient. But a lot of times you'll use this flat 400. This was an adjusted,
just like in REM cap, patients allocated to tocelism map were more likely to be discharged from the
patient from the hospital alive within 28 days. So 54% versus 47% with a rate ratio of 1.23 p-value
of 0.0001. Among those not receiving invasive mechanical ventilation, less likely to end up
on a mechanical ventilator or die. So 33 versus 38. And again, p-value of 0.0005. So let me translate
this. These patients had a background of steroids. And if tosy was given with a background of steroids,
there was a 14% reduction in 28 day mortality with a p-value of less than 0.007. And almost a 20%
reduction in the risk of requiring intubation with a p-value of 0.01. So this builds on the REM cap data,
starting to get a sense of when and in what context and how to use tosy in a manner that is
associated with, I think, really clear, well-designed trial data supporting a mortality benefit as
well as a better outcome, not ending up on a mechanical ventilator. Secondary infection phase,
you know, I always tell people remember your fungal and your bacterial infections. This is a later
part of the disease. Most people coming in are not infected, but there was another nice article
in open form infectious disease, bacterial super infections among persons with coronavirus disease
2019, a comprehensive review of data from postmortem studies. So these are people who ended up
dying, right? So it's not just looking at everyone, it's looking at the people that actually died
from COVID-19. And I think interesting here is which pathogens did you see people die from? So
asinidobacter balmani, staphylococcus aureus, right? I think we've talked about that before,
pseudomonas aruginosa, and Klebsiella pneumoniae. So long super infections were the causes of death
in about 16%. And so we're seeing these infections, but remember, we're also seeing some fungal
infections, seeing a few cryptococcal infections, just sort of to remember it's not just aspergillus
and candidemia. I also want to put a plug in here for TWIP. After we record this, we're going to
record TWIP. And we're going to have our mystery case. And I don't want to give away the answer,
but I may say that this may be a situation where Ivermectin saves the day. So just a teaser,
listen to this week in parasitism. Okay, the multi-system inflammatory phase. This is a
reminder, and we keep seeing this a couple of times today, people are being clapped out of the
hospital. This is a bi-modal disease. People come in during that early inflammatory phase.
We treat them, they're often doing better. But remember, 10 to 15% of those folks are either
going to die in the next 30 days or get readmitted. So a lot of times they get better. And then they
have this second late inflammatory, this multi-system inflammatory phase. And so don't just clap them
out, make sure they have good close follow up, and make sure you're ready to jump in at that
point as well. The tail phase, this sort of actually overlaps the post hospital plan. So we want to be
thinking about what the appropriate anti-quagulation recommendations will be. And actually, we're
going to meet at Ash and try to come up with some evidence-based guidance there based upon what
people are doing, what the studies are. But I also want to talk a little bit about treatment
here. I still find it frustrating. I'm sure a lot of our listeners who have long COVID
find it frustrating that we still don't have a lot of really good data-driven interventions
to help with long COVID. We take care of a lot of COVID patients, long COVID patients here in
New York at Pro Health. But we're trying to consolidate our COVID care, actually. So we can
really learn from each other, learn from patients. So I think one of the big things I just want to
throw in here before we close is that people who have long COVID, who are having problems
exercising, have problems going upstairs. There's a subset that has a significant
post-exertional malaise issue. These aren't people who can just buck up and gradually
increase their exercise. These are people who need to be treated differently. So you really
want to screen for that in your guidance of what these people are going to be doing.
So let me close with our fundraiser before we hit emails. And I want to say thank you,
everyone, who's already gone to parasiteswithoutborders.com and started to contribute. Because
through the months of February and March, donations made to parasites without borders will be matched
and doubled by TWB and donated to the American Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene,
including scholarships for their annual meeting travel awards. And I'm going to focus on that.
We are going to try to raise money and bring women, early career women, from low-income parts of the
world to the annual American Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene meeting, really help them
invest in these young women. And hopefully, instead of 15% of the leadership in so much of
science being old white men, we can actually increase the diversity and the opportunity.
So help us do that, help us make a difference. Our first email is from Dagfin, who's writing from
Oslo, Norway, where it's minus nine Celsius. A question regarding a group of patients frequently
overlooked drug-addicted patients who Dagfin works with, according to their national service,
they are a Norway for not a single case among these patients have been reported. And he sees
similar reports from other countries. Do you have any idea why this group of patients who are
usually very susceptible to infection seems to be nearly unaffected by SARS-CoV-2 virus?
Yeah, I have to say that that is an interesting observation. And though I haven't seen a lot of
data here, that actually goes along with my experience. We, as infectious disease physicians,
interact with and take care of a lot of intravenous drug users, develop a lot of
bloodstream infections, endocarditis, things like that. Unfortunately, what we have seen in the
United States is a significant increase in the amount of drug abuse deaths due to drug-associated
overdoses. But no, my experience has actually been in Lises. We are not seeing a lot of those
individuals. I don't know if it's a younger demographic. You would think that their comorbidities and
the other problems would put them at higher risk for COVID. But no, that actually is in line and
very interesting observation. Laura writes, are there any data about different vaccines ability
to prevent long COVID? Laura is in vaccine priority group two, seems likely by the time she's vaccinated,
multiple vaccines will be given to you ways. The messaging I've heard in the news is if you're
offered a vaccine, take it. However, I'm fortunate to be in a demographic where hospitalization and
death are extremely unlikely. So my primary concern has been long COVID as a healthy 40-year-old woman
with autoimmune disease. Since studies have shown that even a relatively mild case of COVID can lead
to long COVID, it seems to me I would want to choose the vaccine that has the highest
efficacy of preventing disease of any severity. Yeah, no, that's an excellent point, right? And
I think you could sort of do the math on this. You would say, okay, so let's take the mRNA vaccines,
95% reduction in symptomatic disease. We're not really seeing long COVID in people who suddenly
develop symptoms and then find out through serology they were asymptomatically infected.
Clearly, the majority, if not all, of people who developed long COVID had some degree of
symptomatic COVID. It isn't necessarily that you need to be severe enough to be in the hospital,
so preventing severe disease is not necessarily enough. Preventing symptomatic disease seems to be
something we want to do. We are hoping that people who've been vaccinated are less likely to develop
long COVID. And I was actually speaking to one of my colleagues today for Tima Johari,
people who have gotten even a single dose of vaccine when they get COVID, this unfortunately
has happened, they tended to quite well. So I'm very optimistic that the vaccines across the
board are going to reduce the risk of long COVID. At this point, we don't know, and we're still
going to keep an eye on this. Millions of people are being vaccinated, but I see your point,
the J&J, what if we say, oh, it's less effective at preventing mild disease? Are those people with
mild disease who got a JJ vaccine? Are they going to be at a significant risk of going on
to long COVID? We certainly don't know. But that I think is an important thing for us to keep an eye
on. Aviva wants to know about Passover coming up in a month and a half. They will have
six adults and three kids. The adults will all be vaccinated, the kids not,
and they want to know, is it safe? We can test the kids, we can keep them home from school,
we can test them again. There's a debate in this family as to whether this is safe to do. We value
your input. Okay, no, I mean, I am going to have the same situation. I don't know if people notice
or know this, but I will be celebrating Passover. The current plan is my dad's birthday
corresponds with the first Sator, the first night. And so our plan, my mother, is going to be fully
vaccinated. My father will be fully vaccinated. I will be fully vaccinated. And then my wife,
myself and our children. So that's going to be seven of us together. You know, I will recommend
that everyone gets tested. Preferably, you know, the morning, right, it's going to be a Saturday
is the first night, I believe. Hopefully I got that right. You know, everyone gets tested before.
My parents, I actually say, hey, they've been vaccinated. I'm not particularly worried about
them. It's more the risk, you know, my wife is not going to be vaccinated by them. My children
will not be vaccinated by then. I think this is one of the things once people have been vaccinated,
you don't want to undersell and say you can't change things. I actually think that a year ago,
when my parents were not vaccinated, we did not have Passover with them. This year with them
being vaccinated, I actually think we're going to go ahead. And I think that that is a reasonable
risk, but nothing's 100% safe. So you want to consider all this. If my wife, for instance, had
health issues, she had, you know, problems with her immune system, I might rethink that. So you
want to you want to make this an individual decision for everyone. One more from Eugene in Atlanta.
What are your thoughts on getting mRNA vaccine people being immunosuppressed with diseases such
as crone and treated with drugs like stelara? I would imagine not to miss the opportunity of
getting the vaccine, then perhaps resuming the drugs sometime after the second vaccine dose.
Yeah, that is routinely what we're doing. We're still recommending the vaccination. We're not sure
that it will be as effective in these individuals as it would be in someone who has an intact immune
system who's not an immunosuppressant. And this might actually be the population of
communicating with one of the oncologists today, patients who are on certain drugs that interfere
with B cell and other immune function. This might be a situation we actually do do one of these
semi quantitative anti spike serology tests. But no, we're recommending that people get
vaccinated. We're just a little concerned. They may not get as robust a protection.
That's COVID-19 clinical update number 49 with Dr. Daniel Griffin. Thank you, Daniel.
Oh, thank you so much. And everyone be safe. It's so close to the spring. We're going to make it.
