This week in virology, the podcast about viruses, the kind that make you sick.
From Microbe TV, this is Twiv, this week in virology, episode 721, recorded on February 18,
2021. I'm Vincent Racken Yellow, and you're listening to the podcast All About Viruses,
joining me today from New York, Daniel Griffin. Hello, everyone. This is our update number 50,
Daniel, almost a year's worth of updates. How about that? Yeah, that's quite something. Yeah,
I guess 50 is a important number, but let's march through, let's not make this 50 minutes long.
So, off with my quotation, in nature, nothing exists alone, and that's by Rachel Carson from
Silent Spring. I just keep using it, bring people back to the fact that we talk a lot about things
in the US, but we are part of the global community. And if we don't address this virus at a global
level, it is not going to go well for anyone. We are part of the world. No walls that are going
to keep this virus out. My three rules never miss an opportunity to vaccinate, never miss an
opportunity to test, and never waste a vaccine dose. Still pains me when I hear that doses are
being thrown in the trash because people are worried they'll be legal consequences.
So, let's go through our stages. So, the pre-exposure period, there's a lot of coverage on the CDC
guidance on school openings. You know, the CDC, you can go there. There's a lot to read there.
Couple criticisms people have is there may be not enough focus on ventilation. But for the first
time, what I am really seeing is a lot of the school opening plans are introducing testing,
and it looks like there's federal support for testing, testing saves lives.
And I know early on a bit of controversy about testing and a period of time when some politicians
were trying to get people not to test. And I am not talking just about at the federal level,
but we've moved past that. And I think we all now realize, and this has embraced,
testing saves lives. Don't let the testing numbers go down. We need two million tests a day
to keep making the progress we're making, to keep an eye on what's going on. So, you got to keep
testing. Active vaccination, a little bit more out of Israel on the impact of vaccination on
viral load. And I think this is a little bit better than the data that I discussed last week.
I was not impressed with a single CT value change. But this was posted as a pre-print,
decreased SARS-CoV-2 viral load following vaccination. So, it reminds me when I say that.
And Vincent, maybe you remember, we had a big discussion. Are we going to ever discuss
preprints? Are we going to wait until things hit the peer review? And I guess we embraced,
we will be pre-print reviewers and discuss the data critically. But in this study, they looked
at CT values of positive samples collected 12 to 28 days after vaccination. And they compared
these to CT values of positive samples taking during the first 11 days following vaccination.
So, I felt this was apples to apples. And they reported the differences in mean CT values calculated
for these two time periods. Basically, looked at three different, so they looked at RDRP,
right? That's the RNA dependent RNA preliminase gene. They looked at the gene E, they looked at
gene. But just to give you a sense, they were seeing here about a two CT value difference.
So, decreased from about, or I guess the CT value is increasing, the viral load is decreasing.
So, I got to keep that in mind here. So, the CT value was increasing by about two from 25
up to about 27. So, we're looking at an RNA copy number going from about 1.5 million
down to about 400,000. So, that's going in the right direction. We're trying to build a case,
and I'm sure this will come up at the end about if you've been vaccinated, are you less like
to carry a high level of virus and transmit it to others? And I think the data is starting to
support that story. The period of detectable viral replication, I get a lot of people saying,
well, Dan, where are the antivirals? And I want to say this is an excellent question.
We really just have, as far as what we think of small molecules remdesivir, weak evidence,
minimal impact, maybe shortens our hospital stay by a few days, no compelling mortality data there.
But monoclonals, growing amounts of data and evidence there suggesting that there's even a
mortality benefit as well. There is convalescent plasma, but remember the compelling data there
was on high titer used within the first 72 hours. Had a discussion today at our hospitals. A lot
of the centers around the country don't titer their convalescent plasma. By the time someone
shows up in the hospital, they're usually past those first 72 hours. And when you compare apples
to apples here, if you have a choice to drink convalescent plasma and monoclonals, the data
is more compelling on monoclonals. So right now, our best antiviral therapeutic is monoclonals.
But don't miss your window. This is a numbers game. Don't say, oh, you look like you're doing
well. Let's wait. If you wait, you can miss your window. And one of the nice little bits of news
here is we just got approval that we're going to be able to start offering monoclonal therapy
at our urgent care centers throughout the New York tri-state area. So improving access,
we're going to have the ability through the Catholics to get it in the ERs, through the
Northwell system to get it in the tents, through the Pro Health, Riverside, and Pro Health Connecticut
to get urgent care centers. And through United and Research, we're going to keep doing in-home
infusions and down to 16 minutes per the FDA. I know folks are still taking an hour to get it
in there, but we have approval now for 16 minutes. Early inflammatory phase, there was another
interesting paper put up on the Lancet as a preprint. I actually think this is interesting. This
is a paper that I've already seen is changing people's practice. And this was a vitamin D paper,
yes, calcifidile treatment and COVID-19 related outcomes by a group in Barcelona. And this followed
on that pilot study that I discussed on October 4th on that TWIV. So they had done a pilot study.
Now this was the prospective open label randomized control trial. They had under 1,000, just under
1,930 participants. And they were randomized to either receive oral calcifidile treatment.
That was 532 micrograms on day one, 266 on day three, 71530. And they started this right at the
time of hospital admission. And then the controls were not receiving this. So I sort of jokingly
said, you know, I think in the past that nobody's going to do a study with a vitamin D deficient
control arm, but apparently they do that in Spain. And in the intention to treat analysis,
6.5% of the folks treated with vitamin D died compared to 15% in the control arm, giving us a
p value of 0.001. So the adjusted results actually showed a reduced mortality about 60%.
So relative risk 0.40. So what we're starting to see, at least in hospitalized patients,
if people were not listening to me and fouching a few others, and they're not taking their vitamin
D and showing up deficient, a lot of folks are actually starting vitamin D when they get admitted.
But just a few basics here, just to remind people, this study looked at calcifidile
treatment. But a lot of us in the US are using ergo calciferal and coli calciferal, right? So the
coli calciferal is that vitamin D3 that we're taking 1,000, 2,000 different recommended
doses per day. The ergo calciferal is our vitamin D2 that is often weekly. So our D3,
usually animal origin, so oily fish, egg yolks, meat, your ergo calciferal is going to be from
certain vegetables. And so things get a little bit complicated for us here because we don't
quite have the same formulation used in the study. So a lot of us here in the US are just
using the vitamin D3, the coli calciferal, 4,000 I use per day. But I do want to point out check
those vitamin D levels. I had a patient today, maybe he listens to much Twiv. His vitamin D level
was 138 at admission. Normal would be less than 80, sort of a 30 to 80 range. 138, that's too high.
So he and I actually had to have a talk about not taking so much vitamin D. I'll say in some of
the hospitals, it's been fairly standard to give people vitamin D, sort of a thought maybe a benefit,
no significant concern for harm. Some of the hospitals though, this is new. All right,
we had another study actually on zinc and vitamin C. This was not as positive. This was
effective high dose zinc and ascorbic acids, that's vitamin C supplementation versus usual care.
And they were looking on symptom length and reduction among ambulatory patients with SARS-CoV-2
infection. This was the COVID-A to Z randomized clinical trial, and it was published in JAMA.
This was only 214 patients. So by the time you break them down, you're looking only about 50
folks in each group. And they looked at basically the amount of days before they reported a 50%
reduction in symptoms. So usual care, they're saying about 4.4. The folks who got just zinc
said 4.9, vitamin C, 3.7, the group that got vitamin C and zinc, 3.4, a lot of overlap here.
So no real compelling difference. I mentioned this as a small study. And there was the issue
that the folks who got zinc were reporting metallic taste, dry mouth, gastrointestinal
intolerance. So the people in the vitamin C group actually, there was differences in the
amount of nausea, diarrhea, stomach cramps. So small groups doesn't sort of compel us in any way,
more information there. Another paper on anticoagulation. But here was really the focus. And I think
this is an important paper. It was demonstrating a mortality benefit to doing anticoagulation versus
not. Maybe this reminds people of the COVID wars that we discussed about, where we were seeing
about 30% of the folks not in anticoagulation having major events. So there was a tendency to
want to use at least prophylactic and a thought of maybe studying prophylactic versus high dose.
This was actually looking at prophylactic versus none. And there was a 27% decreased risk for 30
day mortality. So really concluding here that early initiation of anticoagulation compared with
no anticoagulation was associated with decreased 30 day mortality. They did not see a significant
increase in the risk of serious bleeding events in this trial. But just to sort of put this in
the context of our other trials, there's now data to suggest that the optimum dosing for our
moderate floor patients is going to be full dose, lower risk of bleeding there. In our ICU
level patients, we're going to back off a little to prophylactic dosing just because we have an
increased risk of bleeding. This does still leave out a little bit. What do we do with those out
patients, right? We still don't have as much data as we would like. So that's going to be a lot
of a judgment call looking at each individual patient. I just want to do a deeper dive into
the tosyllismab data that I mentioned hot off the press last time. And I want to say this is
already resulted in the revisions of a lot of hospital guidelines. Tosyllismab has now been
reintroduced. And this was based upon the recovery data. I'm going to discuss this a bit last time.
Tosyllismab in patients admitted to hospital with COVID-19 recovery trial. Preliminary results of a
randomized controlled open label platform trial. So as I mentioned, last time, this study looked
at over 4,000 patients. And the tosyllismab was given in a weight-based dosing regimen.
So if you're greater than 90 kilograms, you're going to get 800 milligrams. If you're between
65 and 90, it'll be 600 milligrams. 400 milligrams. If your weight is greater than 40 K but less than
65. And then you drop down to an 8 milligram per kilogram if the weight's less than 40.
And then a second dose in this study was given 12 to 24 hours later. If in the opinion of the
attending clinician, the patient's condition had not improved. And here we basically saw that there
was a 14% reduction in 28 day mortality p value less than 0.007. And about a 20% reduction
in the risk of being intimated there with a p value of 0.01. So this this builds on the REM
cap data. But I want to sort of be clear on where this fits in. This isn't everybody gets
tosyllismab. So this is a background of steroids is critical. We have a lot of studies showing
that if you give the IL-6 receptor inhibitors without a background of steroids, even in the
recovery trial, there was a trend towards higher mortality. So you don't want to do that. It also
looks like the benefit we're seeing here is in the early inflammatory phase, right? We have a lot
of trials showing that if you give an IL-6 receptor blocker, so a tosyllismab to someone week three
in that secondary infection, that late phase, that that actually may increase infections,
not provide benefit. So what we're doing here at a lot of our hospitals, I'll say that Catholic
health systems actually have been our standard approach for some time. But some of the other
hospitals, they've they've updated. Basically, if a person comes in, they're on oxygen,
they've been started on steroids, but now they progressed to a high level of oxygen support,
then tosyllismab is considered secondary infection phase. Again, I was like to point out the timing
of that is most people with COVID come in without a secondary bacterial infection. But then a lot
of folks, we see either they stay in the hospital and then week three, they have this, or they go
out and they come back and then are differential. One of the things that can drive that readmission
can be a secondary infection. So finding the ferritin procalcitonin ratio that my buddy Lee Shapiro
has championed to be quite helpful, fairly predictive. If you take the ferritin divided by procalcitonin,
numbers less than 844 suggestive of bacterial numbers higher than that, particularly up in the
thousands suggesting your procalcitonin elevation is being driven by the inflammation are multi-system
inflammatory phase. Actually, you spend a little time on this because we have a little bit more
data now. So I want to point out again, there is an early inflammatory phase,
and then there's this later multi-system inflammatory phase. So there's a bimodal inflammatory nature,
and either for some folks, this is a readmission. As we saw with children, this may be the first
time it comes to attention. So an update on the multi-inflammatory syndrome of children. The number
of cases now reported the CDC is keeping track of this is over 2000, and we've had about 30
confirmed deaths. So the number of, and this is a little bit of different, the number, or I'll
say the percentage of the pediatric cases that are now coming in requiring ICU support,
it used to be about 50%. It's now greater than 80%. So I'm not sure I understand exactly what
the difference is with the severity there. We also understand a little bit of these 2000 cases.
The peak of this tends to be in the five to nine year old rage, and there now is a nice case
definition for the multi-system inflammatory syndrome in children. And the first distinction
is this is someone under the age of 21. If they're over the age 21, it might be in adults, and we
see that as well. They have to present with fever, laboratory evidence of inflammation,
evidence of clinically severe illness requiring the hospitalization with multi-system. So greater
than two organs being involved. This could be cardiac, renal, respiratory, hematologic,
gastrointestinal, skin, or neurological, and no alternative explanation.
And then, ideally, from the case definition, you have positive evidence for either current or
recent SARS-2 COVID infection. So you could be doing your PCR, serology, antigen tests,
or a good story of a COVID-19 exposure within the four weeks prior to the onset of symptoms.
And the CDC now has a nice link where people can go. The tail phase, I want to spend a little bit
time here, just before we got on the air, Vincent and I were chatting about an individual with
Wong COVID who had what sounded like a very negative encounter. They went to the emergency room,
tachycardia, swelling in the legs, continuing to suffer from COVID. And the basically we were
told, hey, this is what your life is going to be like, get used to it. Not acceptable. There are
a lot of us, I have to say, who are really keeping an eye on Wong COVID, taking care of a growing
number of patients. And I have a lot of frustration here. As I mentioned here, we've had a lot of
research on our vaccines. We've had a lot of research on the care of hospitalized patients
with COVID. We still don't have robust data to guide us in the outpatient management.
We don't have robust data to guide us in the care of Wong COVID. There's a lot of centers
that really are set up by, say, rehabilitation specialists. Basically, let's condition these
people back up. And, you know, as we know with our experience with other chronic illnesses,
that's not always acceptable. A lot of people have post-exertional malaise. There's a lot of
stuff going on here. We're still seeing increased infections in these individuals months and months
after the acute period. Something's going on here. And a lot of us are really actively trying to
understand this. So those would be out there listening with with Wong COVID. You're not
forgotten. We're trying to understand and provide better therapies. And one of the things actually
we're quite interested in is if you get a vaccine, are you less likely to get long COVID? So some
people I know who are younger think about the vaccines. And they say, well, I'm not going to
die of COVID at a very low risk of dying of COVID. But I am worried, you know, I might be in my 20s,
30s, 40s. If I get COVID, I might end up never better. So we're tracking those individuals. We're
also tracking ever study fired up on this, where we're looking at people that got the monoclonal
antibodies. Not only is that going to keep people out of the hospital, but is it going to prevent
people from developing long COVID? So a lot going on here. And then I will close before we go to
emails by reminding people to go to parasites without borders and help us support the American
Society for Tropical Medicine and Hygiene. For the months of February and March, we're going to
donate a minimum of $20,000, hopefully up to $40,000, matching what people send us to help bring
some early career investigators, scientists, physicians from less developed parts of the world.
Women, we're going to be sexist here. We're only going to be helping women. But I think that's
right. I mean, 15% of the leadership in medicine in global health is made up of women. And that's
just there's an equity issue there. And we want to jump in. We want to make a difference. So help
us do that. All right, time for some questions for Daniel. If you have some, send them to Daniel
at microbe.tv. The first is from Chris. The CDC is now saying, if someone has been fully vaccinated
two weeks after they do not have to quarantine when directly exposed to someone with COVID. Chris
wants to visit his infant grandson, neither of his parents are vaccinated. It won't be anytime soon.
If I have to quarantine before I visit, what is the minimum amount of time to ensure a good
amount of safety? And Chris has been fully vaccinated. Yeah. So Chris, and I alluded to this a little.
I mean, the the CDC talked about someone who's been exposed, and then saying, hey, we're going
to treat people who've been fully vaccinated like someone who had a recent infection with COVID.
And we're going to, we're going to believe, and they are stepping a little in front of the science,
but the science is starting to get there, that these individuals are less likely to become infected,
less likely to transmit. We know about a 95% reduction in symptomatic. We don't quite have a solid data
on the impact of asymptomatic, but now we're starting to see lower viral loads. So I'm going to
basically give you the information to make the decision here. I don't think quarantine is going
to be something you need to do. You want to continue to engage in low risk activity. Just treat this
as this possibility that you could be exposed, could have low level asymptomatic and not be aware
of it, or you could have pre-symptomatic, right? It's a 95% reduction, not 100%. And don't forget
about testing. Testing is still another thing. You know, we talk about the Swiss cheese approach,
multiple layers, right? So you got your vaccine, you get your test, you look at different exposures
and how to do things safely. But I think that we need to start basically being honest and not
underselling the vaccines. And the biggest risk for older individuals was that they would get
COVID and die. But there's been a tremendous burden, a tremendous social isolation. So that
would be my advice on this. Vaccination is great, but don't forget about testing.
All right, Javad writes, as a primary care physician who works both in the clinic and
hospital and his faculty at both the med school and residency, I'm disappointed at the lack of
guidance there is for COVID management and primary care. There is clear guidance for how to manage
COVID patients in the hospital based upon a fair amount of research. There's almost nothing for
primary care doctors. And Javad goes on to talk about monoclonal antibodies, which are underutilized
in his system at the University of Minnesota, even though we have far more COVID in the community
than in the hospital, basic questions of whether to use anti coagulation and or aspirin have not
been answered. Therapeutics that are logistically more feasible are not known. A small study showed
fluvoxamine could be a game changer in terms of limiting hospitalization, but a larger study is
in its early stages. What would you recommend in terms of outpatient management? We are doing a
lot of testing and monitoring, but it would be nice to have better research and guidance as to
what more can be done. All right, so Javad, you bring up some excellent points. First off,
say hello to my buddies there at University of Minnesota. It's a fantastic place, by the way,
except it's cold. I spent a winter visit there in the end of June once, joking about that.
But no, you are completely right. What the COVID pandemic has really pointed out to us
is what a poor system we have for rapidly studying outpatient therapies, right? I mean,
the monoclonals almost didn't make it to market because they were studying them in week three
ICU patients, right? We really need to change that. We need a robust ability to study
outpatient therapeutics and to point out, right, 80, 90% of folks with COVID are managed in the
outpatient setting. So what do we do? There is limited data. So let me go through what there is.
First thing, it's diagnosed one of the first things. You mentioned monoclonal antibodies.
That's critical. If the person qualifies, and hopefully this is going to expand as far as access,
monoclonal antibodies are a game changer. We do not recommend starting steroids in that first week,
but I'll tell you, in the New York area, a lot of times when you get to week two,
when people start to drop their SATs below 94, we're starting steroids in the outpatient setting,
we're actually doing home oxygen and pulse oximeter. We have actually programs where
we're managing a large number of patients that in other parts of the country probably are in
the hospital. What about anticoagulation in that context? Is it aspirin? Are we using things like
the Eliquis or Zerelto? Can you say brand names there? I apologize. So in some situations, yes,
we do have some limited data on aspirin, providing a benefit as well. But no, you are totally right
here. I saw the SSRI study, this the flu boxamine study. And that is very interesting. And where's
the rest of the data there? Where's the data? I think we've sort of joked about of giving people
vitamin D and seeing if that keeps people out of the hospital. These are inexpensive therapies
that we would love to have the answers to. And we don't. It's a year later. So I see all this data
coming out of the UK. What would we do without the UK? We wouldn't know the benefit of steroids.
And we would know the benefit of when to use tosy. So yeah, we need to do a better job.
William writes, is it safe to receive COVID vaccine if you are incubating COVID-19 or ill
with COVID-19? So William, we don't recommend vaccinating people if they're ill with COVID-19.
Basically, we're treating them with other therapeutics. We're waiting until they get better. And then
the CDC is saying there's no minimum time to wait. Like once you get over COVID-19,
don't miss your opportunity to immunize. If you wait three months, like I know some people
recommend, I feel like you're missing that opportunity. Again, who knows what that person is feeling
like in three months? Maybe they don't want to get vaccinated then. You've lost that. But we've
certainly have seen a lot of folks who come in. They don't get tested. They get their COVID shot
and they were incubating COVID. And I actually a woman I'm taking care of today. And as I expressed
to her, most of the patients that I've seen, unfortunately, I've seen a lot of folks,
where they got their COVID shot three or four days later, they're not feeling well. They're
thinking, you know, this reactogenicity, it's just a little bit rough. And then they get a test and
they realize, no, I actually was incubating COVID when I got vaccinated. These people, I have to say,
tend to do quite well. I don't know if it's that we're giving them a nice boost of the spike protein
response. But when I'm discussed with colleagues, they've shared similar experiences. So we don't
intentionally vaccinate people who are incubating COVID. I've actually encouraged a lot of the centers,
particularly with the high rates that we have of testing people when they come in for vaccines,
if possible, too many situations where, you know, a group comes in and everyone gets vaccinated.
And one of those people in the group has COVID. And then they find out a day or two later,
and then we know everyone there got COVID, you know, riding to and from in the car, right?
So I'm going to encourage people to continue to test.
All right, one more, Daniel from Stefan, whose mother has had a long difficult problem with COVID
starting out on Long Island, in fact, and has taken a long time to recover now is in Florida,
where the doctors say she can be vaccinated, but he's not sure. She's suffering from PTSD,
has difficulty breathing. And he wants to know, can she get the mRNA vaccine? Should she wait for
J and J? She's he's heard about people in Europe, frail seniors in Europe passing away after receiving
the mRNA vaccine. In Florida, he's worried that she's going to get infected if she's not vaccinated.
So what do you think, Daniel? Yeah, no, these are excellent questions. And I think you lay it out.
I've certainly seen some fairly frail, older individuals who, you know, I say the difference
between, you know, you and me with reactogenicity, maybe whether or not we make it to work with
some individuals, the reactogenicity, maybe whether or not they, you know, continue to survive,
right? I mean, a lot of people have significant oxygen requirements. They have pretty severe
disease. I've actually seen a few people get vaccinated actually end up in the hospital for a
few days, because the reactogenicity put them below that level. So this is not one of those
where I just sort of say, Oh, go ahead and have her do it. You want to have a conversation because
this is a risk benefit here. If she gets a second bout of COVID, and we certainly know people get
reinfected, it's a question of what percent, right? You know, how is she going to do when you
describe her getting a second infection? So you want to balance that against the reactogenicity.
The reactogenicity is a couple days of, you know, and in a person who had had prior COVID,
pretty significant reactogenicity, probably going to have fever, probably going to feel crummy,
probably going to have a little bit increased breathing. So yeah, no, this is not a straightforward
decision. And I think this is one of those reasons why I'm not a huge fan of sort of the convention
center mass vaccination site. This is an individual ideally, as you are bringing up,
who has this conversation with her physician, with her family. And then if they're going to be a
progression to get the vaccinations, this is someone you want to keep an eye on.
Matthew Hospital, my mother was there recently out in Port Jefferson.
Yeah, Port Jeff, right.
I'm sure why you went to Florida.
That is COVID-19 clinical update number 50 with Dr. Daniel Griffin. Thank you, Daniel.
Oh, thank you. And everyone, be safe for almost there. Things are getting better.
