This week in virology, the podcast about viruses, the kind that make you sick.
From Microbe TV, this is Twiv, this week in virology, episode 724, recorded on February 25th, 2021.
I'm Vincent Rackeniello, and you are listening to the podcast all about viruses.
Joining me today from New York, Daniel Griffin.
Hello, everyone. This is clinical update 51, Daniel, moving into the second year. Maybe
we will not have to go another year, right? You know, I'm hoping we don't, actually, to be honest.
I mean, we're coming up on some dates that about a year ago. We were just a few days from before
we identified, or I should say, before we could prove that we had identified the first case of
community transmission of COVID in New York City. People may remember it was a leap year. It was
Sunday. I was on a call with all the pro-health clinicians, hundreds of them. We actually have
about 1,000 in New York alone, and then more, if you look at the whole tri-state area.
And it was when the call came in, yes, the Westchester patient has tested positive.
I don't know if people remember that, but he was one of our patients. We were getting concerns
in November that we were seeing a lot of respiratory illnesses that we could not identify.
And then this gentleman got quite ill back and forth. We're not able to get him tested
initially. And then finally, February 29th got the result back. And then he ended up being taken
care of by some of my colleagues at Columbia, which that was about a year ago. Well, when this
drops, it'll be right about a year ago that that happened. Let's get going. We have a lot to cover
today. But let me start off with my quotation. You wouldn't worry so much about what others think
of you if you realized how seldom they do. And that's Eleanor Roosevelt. I was just
rereading that and trying to figure out if she meant that they didn't think a lot or they didn't
think about you a lot or how exactly to interpret that. But what an amazing woman Eleanor
Roosevelt. But the reason I picked that is that just to shout out to all the people that have been
will say, speaking truth, keeping us focused on the science and the evidence during this really
difficult year. And actually, I'll say sort of all the abuse that those people have taken because
they were willing to stand up and speak the truth. So a shout out to everyone that has done that.
Vincent, I put you in that crowd. So thank you for suffering the slings and arrows and keeping
keeping on point. My three quotations, never miss an opportunity to vaccinate, never miss an
opportunity to test, never waste a vaccine dose. And I guess maybe the last should be, we don't need
freezers, we need arms. Over half a million people have died here in the US from COVID.
And I think that's been a very difficult number for a lot of people to grasp. I really enjoyed
the most recent wave and I think people should listen to it. Really trying to get a human face
on this. It's not just about numbers. I recently took care of a father and a daughter with COVID.
They both died. The daughter was significantly younger than I am. So we can't we can't forget
what a terrible disease COVID is, even as I think we're making progress. Another thing I wanted to
reinforce and I try to bring this up repeatedly is that COVID is largely an outpatient disease.
I think we're getting even better at keeping it that way at decreasing the percent of people
that end up requiring hospitalization. But the majority of COVID encounters
have been in the outpatient setting. In the New York, tri-state area, it's been urgent
care centers. It's at primary care centers. I would talk more about outpatient therapies.
And I try to when I can, if there were more studies helping to guide us. And I think
a lack of a network to get evidence-based guidance is a failing. And hopefully one that gets corrected
prior to the next pandemic. I also think there's a lack of appreciation that COVID is mainly
an outpatient disease when we see the vaccine rollout. And I know I've had some conversations
with politicians about the fact that I know we focused a lot on frontline hospital personnel.
But can you imagine if we lost those frontline staff and clinicians in the urgent care centers,
in the primary care centers that have really been stemming the tide, giving people
care without them having to go to ERs and hospitals. So I am happy to see the vaccination centers
finally being set up in zip codes that were hardest hit by the pandemic. So I see that as
being something positive. And I will say, right along in this area, when we get to monoclonals,
when they initially were being studied, right, when Steve Katani and I had that conversation with
Regeneron in early April, we basically said, hey, let's make this happen. And I think it's been
tremendous as we'll get to some of the recently published data that we have really effective
antiviral monoclonals that we can use that are really tremendously effective. Also, my other
disclaimer, I also want to remind our listeners that my goal here is to provide the latest
evidence-based guidance on COVID-19. And I discuss whatever new data comes out. I also discuss
data in preprint form. So I'll have a chance to talk about that as we go further. But there
isn't good new data for me to bring up and discuss, then we just really don't have an opportunity to
discuss those subjects. So pre-exposure period, New York City is now recommending two masks instead
of just one. But I'll go a little bit into this. One thing is I'm going to recommend we outlaw
beards. My wife actually and my daughter Eloise had an experience where, fortunately, my daughter
Eloise has really severe migraines. And they were in an ER at a hospital where a gentleman was there
with acute COVID waiting for his bambling of a map to be set up. And he had, you know,
large face, a large beard. It's very hard to get a tight, proper fit of a mask if you have a beard.
So sorry about that. I used to have a beard when I was younger. And I have to admit,
why did I shave off my beard? It was so that the N95 mask would fit better when I was seeing
tuberculosis patients. So you do want to make sure that you have a mask that fits properly.
You can wear an K and 95 alone. So if you'd really don't want to go to the double masking,
which is now being recommended in New York City, you can just get a K and 95. They're actually
reasonably comfortable. And actually, now it sounds like there's going to be a public
transportation mask mandate, a little bit more on the masking testing. There was actually a nice
paper in CID modeling effectiveness of testing strategies to prevent COVID-19 in nursing homes,
United States 2020. And it's a very interesting paper looking at the potential impact of different
testing frequency and resulting delays on preventing COVID-19 cases. Can you guess what the conclusion
was? Frequency is more important than sensitivity. Getting results right away is really critical.
Those resulting delays have a really negative impact. So very similar to results to what we
demonstrated for the school testing with frequency being more important than sensitivity. And over
92% of cases being prevented with daily point of care testing in this study.
We had some several papers demonstrating that certain approaches can reduce COVID-19
in this particular nursing home population. So I published a paper along with Scott
Shimatsu, Ariel Johnson, and Ethan Burke in the February volume 27 number two of the CDC MMWR.
Hey, that's this month. This was not a modeling, but an actual observation of a 17-fold lower
case rate, the neighboring facilities with the introduction of testing strategies and other
measures. That's COVID-19 infection control measures in long-term care facility, Pennsylvania USA.
I know right now there's a lot going on with the nursing homes, a lot of attention there.
But I just to point out, we can keep this population safe. Testing appears to be critical as part of
these plans. And I think, you know, a lot of people say, and maybe I agree with this. I do agree with
this. You can judge a society by how we treat our most vulnerable. Active vaccination. More
information here suggesting that people who previously had COVID get a very robust boost with just one
vaccine dose. There are a couple papers, but the one I thought that was the most compelling was
robust spike antibody responses and increased reactor genicity in seropositive individuals
after a single dose of SARS-CoV-2 mRNA vaccine. It was posted as a preprint at a melt Sinai.
And they reported that the antibody response to the first vaccine dose in individuals with
pre-existing seropositivity was equal to or actually exceeded the titers found in naive
individuals after the second dose. They put forth a short report on 109 individuals,
68, zero negative, 41, zero positive. And the antibody titers with pre-existing seropositivity
exceeded the median antibody titers in naive individuals after the second vaccine dose by more
than 10 fold. So there's some complexity here. This is not a recommendation. We're not saying
people who've been previously infected should only get one dose. The recommendation is still
for two doses, but just we're getting information here. And we'll look forward to seeing how this
all pans out. Jay and Jay, very exciting. By the time this drops, we're expecting that they'll be
EUA for this one and done, add no viral vector-based vaccine. Come next week, we'll have all the data
presented to the FDA. So I promise to take a deeper dive. We're really going to go into the
details of what we know. And apparently, there's some rumors that there's some data on reduction
in asymptomatic cases. So that's going to directly speak to potential for transmission
and, you know, behaviors that people who are vaccinated and get past that period of time
might be able to engage in. And along those lines, I'm going to comment on what we call
what is vaccine alarmism? What is this? And this is this idea that maybe we're underselling
the vaccine. And a lot of people are saying, well, if I can't change behavior, if it doesn't
change anything, well, why am I even bothering to do this? And there's been a parallel drawn
between masks and vaccines. So perhaps people remember, back in March, when there was the
mask controversy, you know, if masks aren't effective, why did doctors and nurses need them?
And then later, when there was endorsement of masks, people were kind of upset. So sort of
maybe some credibility damage there. But I know that people that work in the government
really have to stick to the party line. And there's a real, let's not get in front of the
science, let's not oversell, let's not have to walk anything back. But I will say we're getting
more and more encouraging information. We do live in a community. If you get a vaccination,
yes, there's really impressive data on your safety. We're learning more and we suspect and the data
is supporting that you are probably less likely to transmit it to others. But remember, there's a
lot of people who have not had an opportunity to get vaccinated yet. It's a decent thing to
continue to wear a mask. And I think I'm probably preaching to the choir based up on who listens to
Twiff. But in mid January, less than half of the vaccines were in arms. It was actually Andy Slavitt
was saying it was 46% as of the January 20th. We are now at over 80% of those vaccines are in
arms. Weekly distributions are up over 60% from mid January. We're hearing prediction of
increased production and distribution going forward. And actually, as long as everything goes
smoothly with J and J, we're expecting millions of doses of J and J to be added to the supply as
early as next week, and then ramp up from there to the period of detectable viral replication or
that viral symptom phase. As I started off, despite so much focus on hospitals and ICUs,
80 to 90% of COVID patients never require hospitalization. And the number that end up in the ICU,
the percentage is really only in the single digits. This is predominantly an outpatient disease.
This is the ideal time in that first week to jump in and do something. So we discussed the Eli Lilly
data previously. When it was announced, it's now published in JAMA. And this was the article
effect of bamlinibimab as monotherapy or in combination with a test of a map on viral load
in patients with mild to moderate COVID-19, a randomized clinical trial. And really nothing
surprising, pretty much similar to what we had heard last time. They reported an 84% reduction
in COVID-19 related hospitalizations or ED visits. And those going on to require hospitalization,
no escalation ICU in the treatment group. There was a patient who got placebo who ended up in
the ICU. This is really a game-changing, tremendously powerful therapeutic that we have.
I know we've been, everyone's been learning a new vocabulary. Maybe it's useful to think of these
as our monoclonal antivirals. People say, where are the antivirals? This is our most effective
antiviral. And you're basically, you got to do the numbers. You can't let someone get sick.
We're having tremendous success. I think I've mentioned our United in research, my COVID-19
plan, which now has 450,000 people enrolled. The option to get tested in the home, hundreds of
people are getting bamlinibimab monoclonal infusions in the home. But this is really going to take,
I think, continued education. If someone is carrying that extra weight, be a migrator than 35
kidney disease, diabetes, immunosuppressive disease, or immunosuppressive treatment.
You're 65 or older, or you're 55 with heart disease, lung disease, hypertension,
or you have a major health issue. You are at high risk. Don't wait till you're sick. Don't
let that window close. Let's go ahead and make sure we keep people out of the hospital.
The last night, my wife was actually asking me, she's standing. Are you okay? You look like
you're not okay. As I told Vincent before the show, my comment, my reply was, you noticed.
I usually try to keep a positive outward appearance, but no, this is devastating to see all these
people end up in the hospital and on ventilators. We can keep a large percentage of people out of
the hospital. If you listen, if you're aware of this, spread the word. Let's make that happen.
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatories for COVID. I'll even make sure I jump in on vaccines with that.
Early on, there was a letter from a concerned pediatrician, a group of pediatricians in France
about not using ibuprofen or napkin or aspirin and the like in people with COVID. But we now know
that it is safe to use ibuprofen, napkin, aspirin, Tylenol to help with the myelgis, the headaches,
the fevers. And there was a nice paper that made it into print, peer reviewed article in the BMJ
annals of rheumatic diseases, use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and risk of death from
COVID-19, an open safely cohort analysis based on two cohorts. This was very robust data. They
looked at over 2.5 million individuals, and they observed no evidence of difference in risk of
COVID-19 related deaths with NSAID use. So really, really powerful, robust data.
Another article that I've been getting a lot of questions about, and this was an article posted
as a preprint that is generated a lot of questions, inhaled butesenite in the treatment of early
COVID-19 illness, a randomized control trial. So what is butesenite? This is an inhaled steroid.
This was a randomized open label trial of inhaled butesenite compared to usual care. So the
physicians are aware, the patients are aware who's getting treatment, who isn't. It was in
adults within seven days of that first week when we usually are thinking we don't want to expose
folks to steroids. The primary endpoint was whether or not there was an urgent care visit,
an emergency department assessment, or hospitalization. The trial was stopped early, and the primary
outcome occurred in 10 participants and one participant in the usual care, and the bedesenite
arms respectively. The difference in proportions 0.131. The number needed to treat per this report
to reduce COVID-19 deterioration was eight. Clinical recovery was one day shorter for their
report and then bedesenite arm compared to the usual care. So medium seven versus eight. So that
one day difference there. If your participants randomized to bedesenite had persistent symptoms
at day 14 versus 28. So I dug through the data a little bit to try to pull out the objective
measures because a lot of the data you're seeing here was based upon questionnaire responses.
And remember that doctors and the patients knew whether they got it or not. So the proportion of
days with oxygen saturations less than 94% during the first 14 days was 19 versus 22.
Butesenite versus the control arm. During the first 14 days 59 and 58% in the butes
and control arms at least one day with oxygen sets less than 94%. So not seeing a huge difference
there. They did look at the the CT values for the SARS-CoV-2 viral loads at day 07 and 14 right
because we would have concerns that maybe giving steroids would interfere with the body's ability
to control the virus. They were not seeing differences here. But what I could not find
was a good breakdown of this large outcome of urgent care, emergency department or hospitalizations
right. There's a small study and there's a big difference in my mind between whether or not you
go to an urgent care department whether you end up in the hospital. I'd also like to see a little
more information on the viral load and a larger end. Yeah, in a small study it's hard to show
a statistically significant difference. So hard to know if there really was. And then the other
and this really bothered me about the study is that to be included in the study you didn't actually
need to have a confirmed diagnosis of COVID-19. You just needed symptoms suggested suggestive of
COVID-19. So I would certainly like to see a larger study where you actually were confirmed
that you were looking at folks with COVID-19. So prior larger studies looking at patients with
chloronic lung disease such as asthma have not seen a signal along these lines. So I put this in
is it interesting but not standard of care changing. And I really felt that their statement and that
their study demonstrated that inhaled steroids were equivalent to the efficacy seen following the use
of COVID-19 vaccines was a bit of a stretch. And I'm not sure that that's going to end up in the
final peer reviewed publication. So just to mention that there we'll keep an eye and see
not ready for prime time early inflammatory phase. I wanted to start by raising concern about the
vitamin D data that we discussed on the last update. The study that we discussed was taken down
and there's now an investigation into the research. So we'll keep an eye on this as we go forward.
But I know our longtime listeners are familiar with my personal stance on preprints and how I'm
not a particularly huge fan of doing that myself. But as you're seeing through this pandemic,
we've been actually using preprints quite a bit trying to review them. And the reality is these
have not gone through a peer review process. And this is actually really critical. And I think this
reinforced by this, even with the peer review process, right? We've had papers that were later
retracted from journals as prestigious as the Lancet. This was the Lancet preprint server where
this was pulled from. But it was very interesting to see it started to undergo something of a public
peer review process. People were commenting. And what they realized here was that the randomization
was suspect. It wasn't as though patients were getting placebo or vitamin D. People on certain
wards were getting vitamin D, potentially wards with healthier patients were getting vitamin D,
wards with less healthy patients were not getting vitamin D. There actually were more deaths than
escalations to ICU level care, which seemed a little suspect as well. And then right about the
same time that this got pulled, a peer reviewed paper on vitamin D was published in JAMA effect
of a single high dose of vitamin D three on hospital lengths of stay in patients with moderate
to severe COVID-19, a randomized clinical trial. So this was a proper multi center, double blind,
randomized placebo control trial conducted at two sites in Sao Paulo, Brazil. And the study
included 240 hospitalized patients with COVID-19 who were moderately to severely ill at the time
of enrollment. 237 were included in the primary analysis. And we do have baseline 25 hydroxy
vitamin D levels, which were 20.9 nanograms per milliliter with standard deviation of 9.2.
So people were coming in on average vitamin D deficient. No significant differences were seen
in length of stay in hospital mortality admission to the intensive care unit or need for mechanical
ventilation. The means your vitamin D levels actually were significantly increased.
They're treating these individuals with a hundred thousand units on admission.
So they were actually bringing them up to a level of 44.4 nanograms per milliliter.
And so as they concluded among hospitalized patients with COVID-19, a single high dose of
vitamin D three compared with placebo did not significantly reduce hospital length of stay.
The findings did not support the use of high dose vitamin D three for treatment of moderate
to severe COVID-19. So I'm going to use a Mark Chris slip line here. People listen to the
podcast. This intervention was safe and showed a non significant association with study outcomes
or let me translate this into it didn't do squat or to be more specific in a proper peer review
well-designed study. There was no benefit to vitamin D. So this really brings us back to this
earlier perspective. There's no benefit to being vitamin D deficient. But again, we don't have
good data suggesting that starting vitamin D once you end up in the hospital is associated
with improved outcomes more on remdesivir repurposed antiviral drugs for COVID-19.
The interim WHO solitary trial results. We again saw little to be excited about with
remdesivir with more results coming out of this large trial conducted at 405 hospitals in 30
countries, 11,330 adults underwent randomization, 2,750 were assigned to receive remdesivir. And
they found remdesivir had little to no effect on hospitalized patients with COVID-19 as indicated
by overall mortality initiation of ventilation and duration of hospital stay. So at $3,000 per
five day treatment, it begs the question of how much of this is medical theater at high expense
rather than any kind of effective intervention. When a local hospital is here, there's still
admitting patients for a 10 day course as their standard of care. We certainly does not seem
supported by the current data moving on to the tail phase in the JAMA network open the paper
sequelae in adults at six months after COVID-19 infection was published. A superior view article
looked at 177 participants. They were mean age about 48, but a range of 18 to 94, 57% of them
were women. As far as their initial COVID, and I think this is important, 6% were asymptomatic,
84.7% were outpatients with mild illness, and only 9% had moderate or severe disease
requiring hospitalization. The follow up was completed at a median of 169 days,
and they found that approximately 30% reported persistent symptoms. Remember, these are mostly
people who did not end up in the hospital. Some of these patients even had initial asymptomatic
disease. The most common persistent symptom was fatigue, about 14%, loss of smell or taste,
about 14%, brain fog, about 2%, and a number of other symptoms. Scientists are referring to
long COVID now. There's a name, the post-acute sequelae of SARS-CoV-2 infection or P-A-S-C,
and they're actually $1.5 billion has been allocated by the NIH specifically for research on this
subject. And I thought Ginger Campbell on the last web did a really good job of pointing out
that there is a sort of a chronic fatigue post-COVID, but there's really a tremendous
spectrum of disability that patients who have survived COVID are experiencing.
And I think this gets back to things like the monoclonals. Death is not the only end point to
be concerned about. If a person ends up intubated, we know that you've basically lost about 10 years
of cognitive decline. You've lost about 8.5 IQ points. A lot of individuals are having issues
with exercise tolerance, with going up a flight of stairs. We now actually are hearing
guidelines for younger athletes before they return to activity, getting full cardiac evaluation,
because we're having impacts upon sports performance. We're seeing long COVID in younger
individuals. So we need to start looking at ways of preventing that. So I always like to keep an eye
on this. The post-acute sequelae of SARS-CoV-2 is not just the fatigue. It's not just the cognitive
function. It's a really broad. We have people with fibrous scarred lungs. We have people with
significant impacts on cognitive function. We have the hair loss. We have the cardiac manifestations.
And around the country, it's springing up all these specialty centers. This is really the second
pandemic that's really ahead of us. All the people who are hopefully not permanently,
but at least right now, still suffering the sequelae. So before I finish, and we hit some emails,
just remind everyone that the months of February and March, February is a short month here,
donations made to parasites without borders will be matched and doubled and donated to the American
Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene. And what we're trying to do here as part of our
support is include scholarships to the annual meetings for three women from low-income parts of
the world, really to help sort of move into the future. Right now, I know a lot of us are focused
on vaccines and we're focused on ending this pandemic. But let's invest in the future. Let's
help us invest in these young women, early career scientists, early career global health.
All right. If you'd like to send an email to Daniel Daniel at microbe.tv. Ross is a
pharmacist in Minnesota who's indebted to Daniel for having his vaccine clinics very successful.
He personally preaches the never miss an opportunity to vaccinate and you don't need
freezers. You need arms and everyone on my team has now been introduced to your podcast. Thank
you for all you do. I have a question. My neighbor is 59. She's healthy. However, she's had three
episodes of Bell's palsy looking at the data in the Moderna and Pfizer trials. It appears both
trials had incidences. However, the rate in both trials was roughly equivalent to what you would
expect to see in the general population. CDC currently has the following guidance cases of Bell's
palsy were reported in participants in the mRNA COVID-19 vaccine trials. However, the FDA does not
consider these to be above the rate expected in the general population. They have not concluded
these cases were caused by vaccination. Therefore, persons who have previously had Bell's palsy
may receive an mRNA COVID-19 vaccine. Interpreting this data can be challenging for a small number
of cases of a rare condition. However, I find it more challenging to assess whether someone
with a history of Bell's like my neighbor would be more susceptible to another event,
or which he fall into that general population, 0.02% risk group. She's trying to weigh her
dueling concerns of potentially having a paralyzed face for life versus being put in a ventilator
if she were to suffer from a severe case of COVID-19. Two questions I'm hoping you can help me with.
One, if she were your patient, how would you advise her concerns? Two, with the COVID vaccines
that we have information on, which might be safest for a person with a history of Bell's
palsy? I'm glad I'm answering this question in the end of February. Two months of experience,
millions of people having received the vaccines, and we do have active vaccine surveillance
adverse event reporting systems out there. We are not seeing a signal. We are not seeing any
increase in Bell's palsy in people who did not or did get vaccinated. It's the same. I think you
can very confidently let this individual know that there is no increased risk being seen in
millions of people being vaccinated. You can pick up those smaller events now that we're
vaccinating millions of people. Go right ahead. There's no reason not to get the vaccine.
Which vaccine? The nice thing we have with the Pfizer and Moderna right now is millions of
people who are vaccinated. We're not seeing a problem. Right now, these are the two vaccines
with the biggest safety record here in the US with a really robust monitoring system.
Go right ahead. I would recommend either of the mRNA vaccines for this individual.
Jan is a registered nurse working a COVID hotline in Wisconsin. Recently, there have been some of
our primary care physicians telling their patients they need to hold ibuprofen before
and after they receive the vaccine. I recall you touching on this at least once. You noted
there is no issue. Has anything changed? Is there any contradiction having a COVID vaccine
while a patient is on an antibiotic for a bacterial infection assuming their fever
free and symptoms are improving? Yes, this is a great question and really give me a chance to
clarify the guidance here. You do not need to pre-medicate. We don't recommend that you do
pre-medicate. Go in, get your vaccine, see how you do. If that next day, it usually is the next day.
If that next day, you're feeling crummy. You're feeling washed out. You got my algae. You got
fever. You got a headache. Even if it's the night after the vaccine, go ahead. You can take ibuprofen.
You can take napper said and you can take aspirin or Tylenol. There are no concerns. This is what
the CDC is advising across and welcome back CDC. But no reason to take it ahead of time. We actually
say don't take it ahead of time. Don't don't hedge your bet. There's no reason for millions of people
to be pre-medicated. See how you do? Most of us actually do fine. I think I mentioned with my second
vaccine, I barely noticed. The only was like what? That few minutes of frustration when I open an
email from my colleague, which I now think was content driven. Mary Ellen writes, my friend had
been donating convalescent plasma. It was told after he was vaccinated with one of the mRNA vaccines,
he could no longer donate. Why not? Why are the antibodies generated from the disease considered
more valuable than the ones generated by vaccine? I understand the vaccine antibodies would be
only against spike. But if the antibodies protect my friend, why won't they protect patients?
This is fantastic and allow me to go into the weeds because this is an exciting question.
We actually suspect that post vaccination serum will actually have higher levels
of neutralizing antibodies, higher levels of antibodies, just in general. So I don't think
there's any kind of science here other than the fact that what did we study? We studied convalescent
plasma after natural infection. So you're sort of stepping out of what was studied. But in parts
of the world that maybe aren't going to have access to monoclonal therapy in the future,
we'll be potentially looking at post vaccination serum, post vaccination plasma,
this hyperimmune globulin as a therapeutic. But I have to say here in the US, most of the data
is basically saying the next generation, convalescent plasma 2.0, is actually these monoclonals.
The best data we saw for convalescent plasma in keeping people out of the hospital was that
study in Brazil, given within 72 hours, high-tighter neutralizing antibody, and only a 50% reduction
in progression. When you see the most recent data, which I just discussed with the monoclonal
antibody cocktail from Eli Lilly, 85% reduction in progression being given out to seven to 10 days,
so even a wider window. So that would be my answer there.
All right, one more from Mary. I've been told to wait 90 days before vaccination because I was
given convalescent plasma. Should I wait? This is going to be one of those situations where yes,
there's a break here. People who receive monoclonal antibodies or people who receive convalescent
plasma, there's concern that those therapeutics will interfere with the efficacy of the vaccines.
And that is different from someone who's had natural infection. Natural infection, we say that you
are unlikely to get reinfected within the next 30, 90 days. So some people are saying there's no
rush, but that actually speaks to exposure to the original wild-type virus. Now that we're seeing
increased invariance, now that there's the potential that those variants are being driven by people
who have waning antibodies, the CDC has said no minimal interval between infection and getting
your vaccination. So as soon as you feel better, we're encouraging people to get vaccinated.
That's COVID-19 clinical update number 51 with Dr. Daniel Griffin. Thank you, Daniel.
Oh, thank you so much. And everyone, spring is just a couple months away. Let's be safe. I know
that the governors and everyone are trying to open things up. But if you could give us another
month or two just to get to May, that would be great.
