This week in virology, the podcast about viruses, the kind that make you sick.
From Microbe TV, this is Twiv, this week in virology, episode 730 recorded on March 11, 2021.
I'm Vincent Draconiello and you are listening to the podcast all about viruses. Joining me today
from New York, Daniel Griffin. Hello, everyone. Update number 53. How's everything going, Daniel?
You know, I will say I still am optimistic here on the ground. Things seem to be going in the right
direction. I was just just today, one of the one of the Catholic hospitals where I go, you know,
they have they've closed their COVID unit. They no longer have a COVID unit at that hospital.
That's one of the other hospitals. The numbers have dropped to maybe 20 percent of where they
peaked. So numbers are going down in the hospital. Unfortunately, we still have several people in
the ICU struggling who probably won't make it. And, you know, and one of your shows, I think,
was Ginger Campbell said that, hey, if you end up in the ICU, it's 5050. If you end up on a ventilator,
I actually say actually it's much more depressing than that. I was reviewing with some of the ICU
doctors single digit survival this time. Really, we're doing everything we can to keep people off
the ventilators. So the people that end up on the ventilators, it really is well under 10 percent
that are surviving in our experience. And then some of the ones that are just tragic,
this one woman who's now out of the ICU, just very vacant. I'm not sure there's much cognitive
function left. So just just a tragedy. So I think her talk about how important palliative care
decisions are is unfortunately really critical here with COVID. My quotation, it is easy enough to
vote right and be consistently with the majority. But it is more often more important to be ahead
of the majority. And this means being willing to cut the first furrow in the ground and stand
alone for a while, if necessary. And this is by Patsy Make. In 1964, she ran for federal office
and won a seat in the US House of Representatives was the first woman of color, the first Asian
American elected to Congress. And I just think that it's a very appropriate quotation. It's easy
to sort of group together. And I hear a lot of people now is just doing a talk for a group at
University of Pittsburgh, where people are all agreeing like, Oh, who could have really seen this
coming? And you know what, we warned about this pandemic for a long time. And we're warning that
this will not necessarily be the last pandemic if we don't respond differently. So I know everyone's
all excited and they want to go out there and have their big parties and hug everyone. But
let's not let this happen again, right? Let's while we're still here, while it's still fresh
in our mind, let's spend the money now, let's make the decisions now, let's get the changes in
place. This doesn't happen again. This this has been rotten. This has been horrible. And a lot of
people have died. So never miss an opportunity to vaccinate, never miss an opportunity to test,
never waste a vaccine dose. Vaccines are getting better. But I'm actually going to start with
children and COVID. As we see more adults getting vaccinated, there's a growing push to get the
kids back into schools, getting ready for summer camp and opening many things up for children.
The one thing I will say on the ground here is this is not going well for kids. I was talking to
my buddy, Dr. Jovino, he's one of the only adults who calls me Danny. And you know, he can get away
with it. But he was saying, you know, we are now seeing its children, growing numbers of children
getting diagnosed with COVID. Last week, we saw the article in the CDC and MWR estimated SARS-CoV-2
seroprevalence among persons aged less than 18 years, Mississippi, and it was made through
September 2020. And they looked at serological tests on blood samples collected between May and
September 2020, from 1,603 persons aged less than 18. And they found on the serological testing,
16.3% of these were positive. And they actually suggested that at this prevalence rate,
over 113,842 of the 698,420 young persons in Mississippi have been infected with SARS-CoV-2
by mid-September. And of note, there's only been 8,993 confirmed or probable COVID-19 cases reported
among young persons to the Mississippi State Department of Health. So if you do the math,
this means that we're only catching about 8% of the COVID-19 infections in this young population,
meaning that over 90% are going undiagnosed. In the same article, they reference the CDC data,
suggesting there have been just over 3 million reported COVID-19 cases in the U.S.
in persons aged less than 18. Now, if this is under diagnosis, instead of 3 million, that would
put us closer to about 40 million cases in children, even with a prevalence of 16%. It means that
over 80% of our children are still at risk of COVID-19. And unfortunately, I think we're seeing that
on the ground here in New York. One of the things, and this was what Dr. Yovino and I were talking
about is that the parents are quite upset because they're saying we were told that COVID was a very
mild thing in kids. What's going on? We were told that children are less likely to die.
They're less likely to hospitalize. They're less likely to have severe COVID.
I discussed the data coming out of the UK that about 10% of the kids that develop COVID,
it is not just a mild, short-lived disease, but it lasts. I was just on a call Tuesday evening
with our pediatricians. Maybe I was just trying to depress myself, but I wanted to ask them and
say, okay, I see the numbers in the literature. But one of the things that hopefully I add with
these clinical updates is what are we actually seeing? Let's translate these studies into what
we're seeing on the ground. And every pediatrician on the call had stories of a growing number of
young individuals that they're taking care of that are suffering. And just to share a few of these
stories with everyone, it was a 16-year-old's girl, loves soccer. She got sick with COVID
two, three months ago. But her family wanted to make sure before she got us, you saw the cardiologist.
They did echocardiogram. Everything was fine. They said, you've been cleared. We think you're
fine to play soccer. This is a gal who used to run several miles a day. Her life is all about soccer.
She tried to play the first game. She was like, I can't run up and down the field.
So she's not going to play soccer this year. And she's devastated. It was another young woman
who had a lacrosse scholarship. She she can't play. There was a boy. This really I found quite
upsetting. He had COVID. And his teacher called the mom and saying, what is up with your son? He
can't pay attention in class. And she said, yeah, he had COVID a few months back. He cannot maintain
his attention. He just gets distracted. He can't keep focus. And so I think a lot of what we're
seeing is the kids, when they're forced either to try to compete athletically, they realize, oh,
my gosh, I am so much diminished where I used to be, or they're asked to do a cognitive task,
like pay attention and do well in school. So I worry about this. This is something we're seeing
in the literature. This is something now the pediatrician shared with me. And even something
has changed a little bit about the multi inflammatory syndrome. My colleague and friend Jay Berger
has taken care of a young individual now, who's in the ICU early on 5050 with these individuals
with the late inflammatory phase ending up in the ICU. Now 90% of them are progressing to the ICU.
So I'm not sure what to say here other than just, you know, we need to be a little bit honest with
the parents is that, yeah, your son or daughter may not die or end up in the hospital with COVID.
They may be at lower risk, but I'm not sure I'm completely comfortable if one of my children
end up getting COVID and maybe having long term complications testing. We saw the first EUA for
a T cell COVID test, the T detect COVID test by adaptive biotechnologies. And this is something
a person can go online, click a few buttons, pay a little more money than most of us would like to,
and actually get a COVID T cell test. So I'm glad we're seeing more attention being paid to the T
cells. My PhD was in B cell biology, but much of my clinical practice and research is focused on HIV.
So T cells have gotten a lot of attention from me over time. You know, a little sad for the T cells
they were neglected there for about a year, but now they're getting that attention that they've,
you know, long had because of the HIV epidemic still is ongoing. So this is a $150 test that
can be done either as an in home or an in lab blood draw. Basically a patient goes on the website,
they click a bunch of buttons. And then this test reportedly compared to the antibody tests are
saying this as a greater than 99% specificity, about a 95% sensitivity. And this is detecting
prior infection with SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19. It's really a fascinating test.
And I was on a call with the same company talking about a study that we're trying to help them with
with Lyme disease. And I realized as we were talking, I said, hey, you're the same people with the T
cell test. This is the same technology. So it gave me a chance to really drill a little bit down.
And the technology, they actually have a preprint out there describing it, preprint is
clinical validation of a novel T cell receptor sequencing assay for identification of recent
or prior SARS-CoV-2 infection. So it's a little bit interesting, but let me just explain to our
listeners like how this technology works and why I think it's superior to the technology we've
been using for tuberculosis tests. And throw my disclaimer, they're not paying me any money for
this, nor do I think they will in the future, but I will explain the technology. Normally,
to look for T cell reactivity to tuberculosis, we do a three tube assay. The first tube is our
negative control. And then we actually draw up a tube, which has some proteins that are specific
to mycobacterium tuberculosis, or I should say, somewhat specific to the mycobacterium
tuberculosis complex. And then we have a positive control with a mitogen, which is going to stimulate
the T cells to produce interfering gamma. You shake those up, you mix that all around,
you have to draw it in the right order. It involves an assay looking at live cells,
so you need to run this within eight hours. You need to treat these tubes properly. You can't
freeze them. You can't let them sit too long. And then what you're going to do is do an assay
that's going to say whether or not you have specific memory T cells that are going to be
triggered by those proteins and produce the interfering gamma, which is your signature TH1
cytokine. Immunologists can yell at me if I made that too simple. I think that's reasonable
description. Now, what this does instead, and it's actually much easier, is you're going to
be doing PCR. So you're merely going to collect a tube of blood. This tube can be frozen, it can
be stored. You do a simple DNA extraction followed by a multiplex PCR that amplifies the rearranged
T cell receptor sequences. And then this PCR product is popped onto an Illumina sequencing
machine. And a computer algorithm is going to identify whether the sequences that are specific
for targeting or enriched for targeting of SARS-CoV-2 are enhanced. And they have a specified
threshold. And there's about 4,000 enhanced sequences that have been identified. So this
actually is quite a bit easier. You don't have to worry about having a lab on site that can do these
live cell assays quickly. How are we going to use this test? I think that's the other question.
I see this personally as potentially something we'll be looking at in those individuals who
we suspect have long COVID, but either couldn't get a PCR test upfront, or maybe have a negative
antibody test and we're trying to pick up those individuals. There was a, I know this was covered
in TWIV-128, but I just want to jump it in here while we're talking about testing. And this was
the paper SARS-CoV-2 total and subgenomic RNA viral loaded hospitalized patients posted as a
preprint. Excellent discussion on TWIV-128. It can't be TWIV-120. I'm sure the numbers often mean 728.
Have we done that many? Have you done that many? And really just confirming that total RNA
copy number numbers correlate with subgenomic RNA. And then although PCR is very sensitive,
when people have millions of RNA copies, when they have CT values in the 20s or lower,
that's probably when people are infectious. And it looks like once those CT values are greater
than 30, RNA copies are below the level of detection of our rapid antigen test, 50,000, 40,000 person
is probably no longer infectious. So just nice to get a little more information there.
Active vaccination, I won't say too much about this, except I am quite intrigued
that J&J seems to be coming out as the crowd favorite, at least among a lot of my patients.
And even what I was seeing is a lot of individuals at one of the large healthcare system. About half
of them have been vaccine hesitant. They seem to be more comfortable with the J&J vaccine.
Sort of the one and done feeling that it's not this mRNA technology. So
exciting to see that. And I know I've spent a little time discussing the potential impact of
vaccination on people with long COVID, passive vaccination, the variants. I hate the variants.
David Ho emailed me this week, letting me know that at last check, more than a third of the
sequences at CUMC have the E484K mutation that at least in the lab makes a bamlin of a map and
in dev a map ineffective. These are, you know, one monoclonal from each of the Eli Lilly and
the Regeneron cocktails. We've already actually started switching our therapies over on the ground
here. So we've tried to switch over to the cocktail therapies with the idea that at least in New
York City, in these regions where we're getting the sequence, about a one and three chance that
you might be giving a therapy that is not effective. But we also, I got to say, this was the week
of monoclonals. We got a press release. Eli Lilly and company announced new data from the
randomized double blind placebo controlled blaze one phase three study demonstrating bamlin of a
map and a test of a map together significantly reduced COVID-19 related hospitalizations and deaths
events in the high risk patients recently diagnosed with COVID-19. So go into a little bit more of the
weeds on this. This phase three included 769 high risk patients. There were 511 got therapy,
258 got placebo. So it was roughly a two to one match events, meaning either hospitalization or
death occurred in 0.8% of those receiving the cocktail, 6% receiving placebo, which represented
87% risk reduction with a p-value of 0.001. So this cocktail bamlin of a map and a test of a map
together demonstrated statistically significant improvements on key secondary endpoints. There
were four deaths total in the trial that were attributed to COVID-19. And they all occurred
in patients getting placebo. Nobody who received the cocktail diet. So that was 0% versus 1.5% in
placebo. So this is interesting, right? You know, number needed to treat and what kind of reduction
are we doing here? The pricing in a sense is targeted to this. You say we've got a population
with about a 10% risk of dying or ending up in the hospital. And we're able to reduce that
dramatically. We know that if a person ends up in the hospital, you know, they have a significant
chance of dying, but there's also a significant morbidity and it tends to be very expensive. I
think we've pegged it at about $40,000 on average for a hospitalization. So they've kind of run
the numbers on this. Your number needed to treat has a lot to do with which risk group you're
targeting here. We also heard from Veer, biotech, and GSK. Where are these people coming from?
I've been sort of watching this in the background, but they released a press release and I thought
this was funny. They promised to post a preprint on the results of their comet ice study. So this
is COVID-19 monoclonal antibody efficacy trial intent to care early. What a name. And this trial
evaluated, this is going to roll right off the tongue, VIR7831. So Veer7831 or that's a little
hard. You can call it GSK4182136. This is a monoclonal antibody. And this is this is neat,
actually. It targets a conserved part of the spike protein. And so they studied this as
monotherapy. I'm going to sort of go into what I mean by that. And they they presented this
press release interim analysis from 583 patients were enrolled and they demonstrated 85% reduction
in hospitalization or death, p-value 0.002. So right in that same ballpark. So a little bit
of notes about this. So this is a very I think a fascinating concept is you find an area on the
spike protein that cannot change without disrupting the ability of the virus to basically complete
its biology. So it's a a required sequence, something that cannot be changed, a conserved
sequence. Interesting enough, this epitope is shared with SARS-CoV-1. It's also an epitope
that SARS-CoV-1 can't change. A couple other things about this antibody is that they are using
this is entertaining a proprietary Zen core extend NFC technology that allows for higher
airway antibody levels and extended half life. So I'm not sure exactly what they're doing to get
it into the airways better. But by changing the the FC, so think about it, I was holding up my
hands like Nixon, you know, and the fingertips are the binding part, but down by my hand,
that's the fragment crystallizable part. You can adjust that and change the half life. So you can
potentially have an antibody that instead of only lasting three months, you might give this to
someone and protect them for six months. So they not only have ongoing efficacy trials such as this,
but they also have prophylaxis trials. Can you get this ahead of time? And I didn't mention the
variants and I mentioned E484K. And what I was going to say here is I really do not like the
concept of variants and we keep talking about different parts of the world. I like to put this
in my mind sort of the way I think about choosing treatment for an individual with HIV. I want to
know what's the mutation and how does it affect my potential therapy, right? So I hate the E4H4K
because we have evidence that that decreases the efficacy of the monoclonal bamblinibimab
and in devimab. Thus, we're switching over to a lot of the cocktails and actually,
this is because this is a lot of this is going out to our pro health doctors. We've started
sending our patients to the Catholic ERs to get access to the Regeneron monoclonals,
the cocktail there. We've also been in talks to try to switch over all our UHG programs to using
the Eli Lilly cocktail instead of just bamblinibimab. So they'll be getting the bamblinibimab and
the test of a map because I think we want to stay ahead of this. We don't want to give a therapy.
We're a third of the time we might be ineffective. Daniel, for HIV, you do genotyping to figure out
what to treat them with. Do you think that's coming for this? I actually am hoping we can do it
rapidly enough, right? So I reached out to Yoshi, Steve, and David. I was like,
so, by the way, can you create an assay for me? Because with HIV, we might start someone on
treatment. They come back the next week and we have the sequence and then we adjust treatment.
But we need to know the sequence now, right? And so people may not know this, but this is
fascinating. Someone with HIV, when I am designing their treatment, I get the sequence of the reverse
transcriptase, the integrase, and the protease. And I base therapy on knowing the sequence of the
HIV virus that is dominantly affecting them. And it's fascinating. And I think that when we look at
monoclonals, there's two approaches. One is we keep regional surveillance and we use cocktails.
The other would be rapid, maybe it's CRISPR-based, where we can figure out, are those relevant
mutations prevalent present in that individual and then adjust therapy based upon real-time
answers. The period of detectable viral replication, the viral symptom phase, another press release,
right, from Merck. And this was Merck Ridgeback Biotherapeutics, and well, so Ridgeback Biotherapeutics
and Merck announced preliminary findings from a Phase 2A trial of investigational COVID-19
therapeutic malnup peer-avir. So this is an oral form of a potent ribonucleoside analog, right?
So this is an oral antiviral. And they reported the results from a multi-center U.S. Phase 2A study.
They were looking at 202 non-hospitalized patients. They were giving this within the first seven days
of confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection. And the primary efficacy objective was reduction in time
to viral negativity as measured by RTPCR. And they described results of the secondary endpoint,
which was reduction in days to negativity of infectious virus isolated in days of pharyngeal
swabs. And they actually did this by isolation in Bureau cell line culture. So I knew that you
would like that Vincent actually did some viral culture there. So there were basically some
in some encouraging data here. So we'll see going forward, we're hoping we can have something like
an oral effective antiviral as opposed to where we currently sit with, shall I say, a relatively
ineffective IV antiviral. All right, there were some Ivermectin, effective Ivermectin on time to
resolution of symptoms among adults with mild COVID-19, a randomized clinical trial published
in JAMA. Double mind, double blind randomized trial conducted at a single site in Cali, Colombia.
They enrolled 476 adult patients with mild disease symptoms for seven days or fewer.
And this was a one-to-one randomization, either receiving Ivermectin, 300 micrograms
per kilogram per day for five days or placebo. And the primary outcome was timed resolution of
symptoms within a 21-day period of follow-up. The median time resolution symptoms was 10 days
in the Ivermectin group compared to 12 days in the placebo group. Hazard ratio resolution of symptoms,
not really significant here. By day 21, 82% in the Ivermectin group, 79% of the placebo group
had resolved symptoms. So they concluded in the study that among adults with mild COVID-19,
a five-day course of Ivermectin, compared with placebo, did not significantly improve the time
to resolution of symptoms. And they went on to say, the findings do not support the use of
Ivermectin for treatment of mild COVID-19. There are several issues with the study.
Apparently, on October 20th, the lead pharmacist observed that there was a labeling error.
And everyone was receiving Ivermectin. And no one was getting the placebo during this period of time.
No biological data. Population was very young. There are a lot of ongoing trials. I'm just
going to leave this as this did not support the use of Ivermectin. I want to spend a little time
in the future when I get more data on flu voxamine, just because I know a lot of people are discussing
this. And as we get more data, I'm going to jump in and talk about that. I love the idea of early
oral options. The tail phase and long COVID. I'm actually going to spend a lot of time. This is a
longer section than usual. And I know long COVID is not as exciting as the variants.
But the long COVID population, I feel like I've really become committed to this population.
And there was a paper. Shane Crotty doesn't like this paper, just as a disclaimer.
COVID symptoms, symptom clusters and predictors were becoming a long-hauler looking for clarity
in the haze of the pandemic. And this was posted as a preprint. And the authors described 1,407
long haulers that had never required hospitalization for COVID-19. And they reported that there were
certain characteristics that were more likely to be seen in long haulers, such as female sex,
normal BMI. And these were more likely to become long haulers. And this was interesting.
They suggested that as many as 32% of the long haulers had an initial infection that was asymptomatic.
Certainly a lot of limitations here. But as one analyzes this paper, it's interesting.
I'm not going to hang my hat certainly on 32%. But this is actually something that we're seeing
in clinical practice, something I've seen in clinical practice, where individuals come in.
There's no clear acute COVID. As we dig in a little, we get a potential exposure that was
maybe a few weeks or a month before the onset of these symptoms. And then we get a positive
antibody test. So I do think, and I would say my clinical practice, I've seen people who I
certainly feel comfortable diagnosing as long haulers, having long COVID, who did not have a
symptomatic acute illness. But then later on, started to develop all the classic symptoms,
loss of smell, loss of taste, the hair may have fallen out, the fatigue, the brain fog.
And I think it will be interesting too, with the T cell test to see if those people who are
serology negative have evidence of T cell response. Here's the big thing I am getting. We are all
getting lots of questions about upcoming gatherings, Passover and Easter. And I actually got one
text. I thought it was funny. It was a, it was sort of a news article. Well, it was a news article
in the CDC updated guidelines and the text was, is this real or fake news? Are they really going
to let people vaccinated get together indoors with people without masks? So I thought it was
entertaining. And so I'll hit it here. We do, as people probably have heard, this was discussed
on the last wave. We now have the following recommendations from the CDC where they say,
fully vaccinated people can visit with other fully vaccinated people indoors without wearing
mask or physical distancing. Or they can visit with unvaccinated people from a single household
who are at low risk for severe COVID-19 disease indoors without wearing masks or physical distancing.
You know, this is really, I think, the part that a lot of people are asking me about.
And there's certain assumptions here, which I'm going to say I'm not sure how comfortable I am
with these assumptions. Because what is really someone at low risk for severe COVID-19? You know,
I brought up with the children. You know, my son is 15. One of my daughters is 18. The other
daughters 20. And I know there's a certain idea that we'll take the 15 year old who's on the younger
side. You know, if he got COVID, he loves running. Sports are a really big thing for him.
If he, you know, he runs a five something minute mile as a freshman in high school,
if he was not able to do that, that would be a huge blow. So I don't just look at him and say,
I'm worried about him ending up in the hospital. I'm dying. I'm worried that he might, you know,
really have long COVID if he might have a negative impact. So, you know, we need to really sort of
think about these decisions here. So just putting that out there.
As per the CDC currently authorized vaccines, the US are highly effective. Like what are we
doing here? They're highly effective at protecting vaccinated people against symptomatic and severe
COVID-19. And also there tends to be more evidence every day, a growing body of evidence,
suggesting that fully vaccinated people are less likely to have asymptomatic infection
and potentially less likely to transmit SARS-CoV-2 to others. So I think that that's at least what
the CDC puts forward is what is the thinking behind this? So I don't want to give any specific
advice, you know, on a case-by-case on Twiv, but I certainly do all day over the phone and in person.
But we often get the questions about, you know, how do we make things safe, right? People are
going to get together over Easter and pass over much as they did over the Christmas and New York
holidays. So what are the different factors that can play into your decision? So one,
being vaccinated, that's the biggest thing I can recommend. If you have access to vaccination,
go ahead and get vaccinated. The vaccination access is improving dramatically and quickly.
I hate that we're on a clock here. The other is people who've had prior recent infection in the
last three months, they seem to be less likely. And that also relates to people who have recently
received monoclonal. So that's sort of your lowest risk group. The other is group size.
We know that the smaller the size, the better. So if you can keep these sizes small, you know,
think about that. We are really getting here to the end of the pandemic. I mean, I've been saying
that for a little while now, hopefully just a little while. But really, we have turned the corner.
The numbers are dropping. The percentages are dropping. I think that we're all hearing that,
hey, by the end of May, everyone who wants access to a vaccine in the United States will probably
have had that shot. So this is the final lap. Think about that question that I brought up with
children. I know they may not end up in the hospital. They may not die. They may be at lower risk for
those. But you know, they are not, you know, I feel bad when those parents come in and say,
how come no one told me? You know, children can get sick. Children can have long COVID outdoors
versus indoors. It's a beautiful sunny day here in the New York, tri-state areas we record.
Outdoors versus indoors. Time outside. We now think we've been saying this for a while. The data
tends to hold about 20 times safer than indoors outdoors. So much better testing. Don't forget
about testing, right? Testing is not perfect. But as we saw around Thanksgiving, around Christmas,
around New Year's, around Hanukkah, if you test and you pick up people who are positive, you can
pull them out. You can, you know, just these are layers of making things safe. Behaviors, right?
Alcohol and hugging. I think that's what everyone's looking for too. Drinking alcohol and hugging
everyone. These are factors that weigh in. Community prevalence. You got to pay attention. I have to
say right here in Nassau County, where I'm out here recording, we're not doing well. And we're not
doing well around kids as far as the prevalence levels. So your local community prevalence,
the community prevalence where the people attending are coming from, that impacts the risk. Health
status and risk factors for the attendees. You know, that needs to be factored in. If you've got
someone who's undergoing chemo, do you really want to get together now or do you want to wait
until prevalence drops and vaccinations more widespread? And then of course the behaviors before
and after the event. I know a lot of us are exhausted. We're done with this pandemic. We just want to
quote unquote get back to normal. But if you are thinking about getting together for these
holidays, another layer of protection is really minimizing your exposures, you know, before the
event. And then, you know, consider that if this was a potential exposure, how are you going to
behave after the event? So I'm going to finish there. And then I'm going to say, hey, unless you're
driving, drop everything you're doing, go to parasiteswithoutporters.com, continue to support
us. Thank you so much. You know, we are going to continue during February, March and April to
support the American Society of Tropical Medicine. We are hoping to get up to a donation of $40,000
to give to them. Because we want to help early career women from low income parts of the world
come to the fall meeting. Hopefully that's going to be safe and this is going to happen.
Because there are a lot of inequities. I think everyone has there's been a light shown on the
inequities in the world. We want to turn that around in the field of global health. And we want
to give these young women from these parts of the world an opportunity help us make that happen.
All right, it's time for Ask Dr. Griffin. If you want to ask a question, Daniel at microbe.tv.
First one is from Douglas, who is an emergency physician in California. He says, you're very
enthusiastic about the use of monoclonals. But my take is that it's marginally at best
for preventing significant complications of COVID-19 with the best data showing an NNT of about 20
to prevent an emergency department visit or hospitalization and larger studies showing
no clinically relevant outcomes. Is there something I'm missing? I realized the recent press release
for BAM and Etsy reported a significant hospitalization of death and patients recently diagnosed.
I would assume they did not find a statistically significant decrease in death alone. Otherwise,
the press relief would have mentioned it. The IDSA currently does not endorse use of these drugs.
While I have been working on getting monoclonals for our Medicaid patients primarily on the basis
of health equity, I'm not sure it's worth the effort and cost $1,275 infusion fee that our
hospital charges for are uninsured. This perfect timing, thank you for writing in now. I got to
just present the phase three data. I've been hearing that this phase three data was going to come out,
and Vincent and I actually were on a call on Sunday with where people from Regeneron were
saying their phase three data is going to come out. I've been getting a lot of personal communication
and actually, as the PI on the largest post-EUA BAM on Evan map trial, which now I think is going
to transform into a Eli Lilly Cocktail trial, we've been seeing really incredible impact.
Just to give a story on this so people can put it in, we can get some numbers in here.
My partner, Nujali, got consulted a patient. Day three of illness, their son had the COVID.
This gentleman comes in dehydrated, hasn't had anything to eat or drink for a couple of days,
gets IV hydration, not hypoxic, high risk in his 80s, multiple medical conditions.
Her advice was we got to get this person out of the hospital, out of the ER, let's get them the
monoclonal cocktail. As we just saw from the phase three data from Eli Lilly, really impressive going
from a, we'll say it was a six percent people moving forward ending in the hospital to less than
one percent. If you look at this individual, he probably has probably about 20% chance of ending
up in the hospital. You reduce that from 20% down to, we'll say a five percent or a four percent,
that's pretty impressive. What we were seeing out of the mail and now boom, we have this in this
phase three trial, nobody receiving the cocktails died. We're seeing a big mortality reduction.
When you look at the cost, that's what they basically, I've said, that's how they're pricing
the drugs. They're saying if you target a population with a 10 percent likelihood of ending up in the
hospital and you can drop that by 75 percent, now I'm going to say 85 percent, that makes that
thousand dollar cost of the monoclonal cocktail makes sense. It actually saves a healthcare system.
It saves an insurance company. It saves Medicare and Medicaid money versus the hospitalization.
Also, here we are. This is the most effective therapy that we have. This has a mortality
reduction, pretty significant. This has a huge impact on progression. If you interact with
people that have gotten these treatments, instead of being sick for weeks and maybe being chronically
ill, maybe getting long COVID, 10 to 20 percent of the time, we are seeing that these patients at 36
hours are, most of them saying, I feel tremendously better if they got this in time. Instead, the
push from the ER doc for my partner, Anu Jalee, was we got to get this person in the hospital,
kind of started by Remdesivir. Her response was, hey, it's day three. They're not hypoxic.
And by the way, Remdesivir, I'm not sure it ever saved anyone's life. I think the data is really
impressive here. I've been waiting for this to be now. It's out there. I think it's just a matter
of time before the Regeneron joins, and we get much more use and appreciation of the monoclonals.
Al is an ID doc in Canada due to the delayed vaccine rollout here from international supply
restrictions. Our province recently moved to delay the second shot of mRNA vaccines for four months,
citing UK and Israel data for effectiveness after a single shot. Many frontline workers
who see COVID patients, including myself, have now had their second shot canceled.
I'm aware of the UK and Israeli data. I myself feel like we are playing with fire doing this,
having a large unboosted population. Seems like a good way of developing escape variants,
as well as not adequately protecting frontline healthcare workers. I'm really curious
what an outsider's perspective would be on this, as it's very difficult to voice a
clinician's perspective over very tightly controlled public health messaging.
Now, Vincent, this is from Canada. Is that right? Did I get that right?
That's right. That's right.
Okay, good. Good. I feel comfortable criticizing the Canadians there,
not very violent people. So I want to make sure it wasn't some nationality that I would get in
trouble. Yeah, I do not. That's exactly my fear. I worry about selection for variants when you have
a low level of antibodies. This is like giving someone a half a dose of an antibiotic every
other day or basically trying to create selection pressure. I know Paul Bines put out an opinion
piece on this. And I actually, that is a fear I have. So yeah, not excited about that approach.
Miles writes, my daughter-in-law is pregnant. First time, 11 and a half weeks, does the lower
react to genicity of J&J vaccine make it safer for her? At what point should she get vaccinated?
Yes, that's a challenging question I have to say. I'm very careful to say the best vaccine
is the one that you have access to, because if you say, oh, but I can get J&J in two months,
that's not great. If you went in and say, hey, I got either one, I could take the J&J,
I could take the mRNA. There is some suggestion, pregnant women, you really don't want them having
fevers. So is there certain advantage, the J&J, because of less likelihood of having fever?
There's two sides to this, let's say, as far as safety experience. We now have had
millions of people get the mRNA vaccines, tens of thousands of pregnant women. They all seem to
be doing really well. The J&J platform was used in West Africa, down to as young as four months of
age. A lot of pregnant women, we have a long experience, sort of afterwards seeing that there
were no issues. There's really no significant concerns in my mind to any of the vaccines with
pregnant women. So I think I'm just going to circle right back, as I did here to say,
a lot, a lot of evidence that these are safe, effective, and the thing you don't want to be
is unvaccinated during a pandemic, particularly if you're pregnant.
Last one is from Gary. Can you tell me what it means that Janssen COVID vaccine protects
85% against severe disease and 100% against hospitalization? I thought severe disease
meant requires hospitalization. What severe COVID does not require hospitalization?
So yeah, I think that we need to all use words a little bit better here, a little bit more specific.
Yeah, it's interesting that we were having a discussion. One of the local hospitals really
wants to basically shorten the amount of isolation to 10 days from symptom onset, sort of no matter
what. And I was actually pointing out that the definition by the CDC of severe is someone who
requires hospitalization and supplemental oxygen, like, no, no, when I say severe, I mean they're
on a ventilator, which basically means no one's going to end up with any more than 10 days of
isolation. So if you went through and actually this was done, I think pretty well on Twib,
I feel like Rich was sort of struggling with this. How are you using these words? And if you have,
you know, a positive PCR and two symptoms, then I think ultimately what I did is I walked away
and said, I'm going to forget this confusing terminology and I'm going to ask the really important
question. Day 28, did anyone end up requiring hospitalization? Did anyone die? And the answer
was zero in the vaccinated group. So 100% of preventing people from ending up in the hospital,
100% of people keep them from dying of COVID. And that in my mind, that's that's moderate to
severe COVID. If you can stay in the outpatient setting, if it's nothing more than the sniffles
that are fever and you feel crummy, that's success. All right, that is COVID-19 clinical update number
53 with Dr. Daniel Griffin. Thank you, Daniel. Oh, thank you so much. Everyone take care and be safe.
