This week in virology, the podcast about viruses, the kind that make you sick.
From Microbe TV, this is Twiv, this week in virology, Episode 733, recorded on March 18, 2021.
I'm Vincent Draconiello, and you're listening to the podcast All About Viruses. Joining me
today from New York, Daniel Griffin. Hello, everyone. This is clinical update number 54.
How's things going, Daniel? You know, I continue to be optimistic. You know, as I was saying the
other day, you know, that we've said over time, it's, you know, it's a race, the vaccine against
the virus, but, you know, that the governors are doing everything they can to help out the virus,
right? So we are doing everything we can to ramp up the vaccinations. And I actually don't have
people heard, but there have already been over a hundred million vaccine doses given out in the
United States. We haven't quite got to 100 million people fully vaccinated, but we are cranking through
the vaccines. I know a lot of our listeners, I don't know what percent at this point, are here
on Long Island. Long Island has been a little bit of a vaccine desert, I have to say, but
when this drops on Saturday on Friday, three mass vaccination sites will open on Long Island. So
exciting stuff for getting getting people a lot more chance to get vaccinated. But I'm sort of
jumping into my sit rep before my quote, but that's okay. We'll get to the quotation. We're sort of
sitting on this plateau. And as I'll discuss a little bit later, what we're seeing as far as cases,
we're seeing a disproportionate number of these in the younger population, so in kids. So we'll
make sure we discuss that. But let's start with our quotation. And this is again, Eleanor Roosevelt.
Great minds discuss ideas, average minds discuss events, small minds discuss
people. And the reason I throw it out there, my whole hope is as we come out of this,
that we learn what went wrong. And we learn what to do so that this never happens again.
And I know a lot of the discussion is about people who did what wrong. I don't think we
learn from that. Those people will probably not be here the next time around. But the lessons
will be there. The events will be there. The ideas about how we can do better the next time. So
I just want to throw that out there. I really do hope we learn from this. I do hope it doesn't
become about just about blame and take the focus off the fact that this was a horrible thing that
happened. This still is a horrible thing that is happening. But we can respond better the next time
I do hope. So never miss an opportunity to vaccinate. Never miss an opportunity to test and never waste
a vaccine dose. So as I mentioned, we're here on this plateau. Our plateau in New York is not
as low a plateau as I would like. So we're sort of going against this with our vaccines.
But as I mentioned, children and COVID, this has become a very hot topic. And the hottest topic
I think this last week is three feet versus six feet. And I know I heard one of the physicians,
scientists who was sort of discussing this saying, oh, this is just a distractor. But let me actually
go into the weeds in this because I actually want to say that my involvement with schools,
camps, different venues to get children sort of back into more of a normal situation.
This actually is a critical issue. So what got this all being discussed? And there was a publication
Effectiveness of three versus six feet of physical distancing for controlling spread of COVID-19
among primary and secondary students and staff, a retrospective statewide cohort study. And this
was published in CID. So one of the things I am going to say as I go through this is I do want
our listeners as painful as it is to try to actually read this article. Because the headlines,
I do not think really match with what's in this article. So let me discuss a little bit about
what this article contained. So they reported on 251 eligible school districts. So 537,336
students and 99,390 staff who attended in-person instruction during a 16-week period. And they
gave us incidence rate ratios with confidence intervals. Now I'm going to focus on the students
and not the staff, but there is data there on the staff. So they reported, this is sort of their
conclusion, that student case rates were similar in the 242 districts with greater than three feet
versus greater than six feet of physical distancing between the students. And they give us an IRR,
an incident rate ratio of 0.891 with a really wide confidence interval. And the results were
similar after they adjusted for community incidents. That came in 0.904 with, again, a wide confidence
interval stretching from 0.6 all the way up to 1.325. And they concluded that they did not see any
significant difference in the staff incident rate ratios. And also, as they say here with
these wide confidence intervals, they couldn't show that there was any significant benefit to
six feet versus three feet. Now let's go a little bit into this, because I think this paper will
impact policy. So therefore, I think it's important that we spend a little time understanding how
reliable this data is. So first off, this is not any kind of a prospective control trial,
but rather was a retrospective analysis of publicly available data derived from case reporting to
the Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary Education. And they looked at publicly
available district plans. I want to make the point here. This wasn't even an observational study.
They actually didn't even go out and observe to see what was going on. They basically looked at
what were the published plans. There was no verification what was actually going on.
They just looked through the plans, and then they looked at some publicly reported
case rates. So they looked and they said, OK, districts that permitted a minimum of greater than
three feet in distancing, even if greater distances were preferred, they're going to classify them as
the three feet group. Districts that allowed greater than three for some grades, but not all.
Those were all classified as greater than three. Now, schools, the only ones that were greater
than six schools that open in hybrid learning mode with requirements of greater than six feet
in the hybrid model were classified as the greater than six feet physical distancing.
Then what they tell us is of these over 500,000 students, they identified 4,226 cases.
So of all these students, we are seeing reported positive cases to the Department
of Health, based Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary Education
that they had a case rate of 0.8%, right? So this is a very small number.
A couple of things to also add. The majority of the campuses that did open had less than
80% of enrolled students on campus. They do comment on the fact that active surveillance
was rare, right? So we have to throw in what we learned from last time that the majority of cases
in this age group are missed. They also lumped all the schools together and based their analysis
on, as I mentioned, publicly available plans. There was no verification of what was the actual
practice. And then what they saw was this rate ratio of 0.9% for six feet over three,
but this really wide confidence interval. So I think the tough thing I had with this paper was,
this falls into what I say of things that we want to be true or don't want to be true.
And I don't think that there was anything here in the data that really gave us clarity on this
issue. So what I did want to do was sort of bring people back to, I think, a paper that actually
was a little bit better at giving us insight. What I looked at this paper and I said,
people now want to say that we need three feet or three feet is fine compared to six feet.
And the reason there's so much focus here is that most schools in our country,
if six foot separation is required between the students, between the desks, that's going to
prevent them from a full in-person opening, a sort of return to this full in-person class.
So there really was, I want to say, sorry to the authors of that paper,
but there was an excellent paper published in the Lancet back in June. And I think we've spent
some time on this before, but I want to sort of bring people back to it. It's amazing that
something in June is old news, but physical distancing, face masks, and eye protection to
prevent person-to-person transmission of SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19, a systematic review and meta-analysis,
right? So this was back in the Lancet. And the point this paper made, which is really something
consistent with what we've learned over the years, is that there's a continuum to risk.
There's no invisible barrier at six feet or at three feet. I still remember having a discussion
with, I think it was a reporter back in April who really wanted to be within three feet of our
friends, and six feet seemed excessive. Now in medicine, we talk about droplets, we talk about
aerosols, we've looked at diseases like measles and laryngeal tuberculosis, where really an infected
person comes into the office waiting room minutes later, just about every susceptible person is
infected. Now influenza, in contrast, where a mask, distance, good ventilation really makes
sitting across the room a much lower risk activity, right? And I know there was a lot of time spent,
you know, is it airborne? What is an aerosol? You know, and I think we need to be careful of sort
of getting mired down in the medical terminology. And I think there were in some quarters, and
there still actually continues to be in many quarters, challenges with science communication
around this issue. We've talked about larger droplets, which in some situations, in some
percent of them will travel more than six feet, so they don't all drop magically.
And some some virions, infectious virus particles, to use that as it's supposed to properly be used,
I understand, they can actually be in those smaller size droplets. So nothing is black and white
here. There are continuums here. But I think this translates into the fact that if you have poor
ventilation, the law of averages is such that a small percentage of these smaller size particles
that might have virions in them are going to start to build up in a room. So if you go back to this
paper, and I'm going to say, you know, not all you're driving, but this was a good read, you can
actually really see a beautiful figure where they show that the absolute risk really does drop in
that first meter. So that 3.3 feet by about 80%. But then if you get out to about three meters,
you're seeing you're getting down to about a 90% reduction. So you can see you get the most
bang in that first meter, but you get even more in that second meter. So it's a continuum. We've
talked before about how a mask drops our risk by about 80, 85%. We've talked about eye protection
being associated with another drop in risk. And I know this study in Lancet didn't really spend
much time on proper ventilation, but I think we can add that into the mix. So I think as we hear
that the CDC is continuing 3 feet versus considering 3 feet versus 6 feet, what's really being considered
is a full plan. If you have masks, if you have 3 feet, if maybe you put up plexiglass barriers,
if you upgrade your ventilation system or have open windows, putting also into the equation
community prevalence, we do know that schools, we think we know that we don't have a lot of
actors surveillance that schools can be opened safely. We also know they can be kept closed and
we also know they can be opened unsafely. So I think as we get into this decision, it's important
to look at the science and balance our risks. And as we get into our tail end about long COVID,
I'm going to be talking a little bit about long COVID in children again,
because this is getting more attention and we're getting more stories about what's happening there.
All right, let's move into testing. Testing is sort of a short section. I'm sort of
a little bit dismayed at the drop in the amount of testing that is going on. If you actually go
to these mass vaccination sites and you start asking the volunteers and the people working there,
hey, what were you doing before you came and started working here, a lot of them were involved
in the mass testing sites. So we're seeing a shift of resources, a shift of focus, a shift of energy
from testing to vaccinations. And we still, if you look around, we're at a higher level now than we
were during the quote unquote second peak of the summer in a lot of parts of our country. So
we really have to continue having testing as part of our approach. And there really was a lot of
money in that last plan that just came out to have testing as part of an approach. So
there's been a lot of good work done on this. We actually did some like to think it was good work.
It's now published. I'll have to tweet that out to everyone. But you can actually look at cases
prevented, how much does it cost per case prevented, and particularly if someone else is paying for
those testing bills, which is now what's supposed to be happening with this new stimulus bill,
we can make testing part of a safe reopening plan. Active vaccination. We actually saw really
encouraging data. And this was a big discussion before. If you're going to approach a disease
with a double dose vaccination strategy, how many of those people are really going to come back
for that second dose. So we saw a bit of information from the CDC and the MMWR COVID-19 vaccine,
second dose completion, and interval between first and second doses among vaccinated persons,
United States, December 14, 2020, February 14, 2021. And this was impressive. As per the CDC data,
only about 3% of individuals are reported as missing that second dose. So this is, I have to
say, very encouraging. This may even be, I'm going to venture to say even an overestimation,
because we know a lot of individuals, maybe they went down to Florida, got that first dose,
and then they came up to Massachusetts to complete their series, is the track and
good enough to catch that they really got that second dose. What we're seeing, I think, is a
really good uptake of people who get that first dose getting that second dose. So I have to say,
this is really encouraging. The other thing I want to throw in here is something that we're
getting more and more information about. We're hearing more and more confirmatory experiences
of people with long COVID, go ahead, get vaccinated, and actually feel significantly better.
This is something I started to notice early and early in January. I was a little bit worried,
is this going to hold after that second dose? After the second dose, it's holding, which is
pretty impressive. Say, my personal experience is probably about 30 or 40% of my patients.
My wife was just asking me, is it still holding? And of course, today, I got a call from one of my
patients who works in education, really a lot of difficulties, including, well, really, almost
anything. She seems the hair loss, the fatigue, pretty significant cognitive issues, the brain fog,
really concerned about her ability to function. Today, the call was just about a rash. And she
said, boy, I really am continuing to improve. I'm continuing to feel better. So this is really
exciting. We'll get maybe a little bit more ideas into why this is happening. We have a couple
theories out there we don't know. But that is definitely exciting to see vaccine as therapeutic.
We also have vaccine trials in children, and they're all up, they're getting filled, they're
running forward. We actually heard that some of the vaccine trials are looking at going as low as
children, as young, as six months of age. And this is fantastic. I think we've talked about,
you know, will we ever reach this herd immunity? If we don't have vaccinations in our children,
then it's going to be pretty challenging unless Peter Hotez wins over the hearts and minds of
every single adult. Passive vaccination. This was an exciting, complicated,
challenging last week, I have to say. So this last week, the US Department of Health and Human
Services said it would limit distribution of BAM, linibimab, monotherapy, in a few of our states,
California, Nevada, Arizona. And this was due to high levels of variants, hate those variants,
that contained L452R, right? So they've got a mutation that seems to be impacting the efficacy
of BAM linibimab, wanting us to switch over to cocktail treatment. Not only have we started to do
that in those three states, but we've switched over almost all our sites, I have to say here in
the tri-state area. So by the time this drops on Saturday, I think almost all the sites will
successfully switch over. You know, in research, all our home infusion, we are rapidly switching
everything over to cocktails. And I think I'll sort of explain, like, why are we doing that?
Why not just these three or four states? We do not have the level of surveillance of the genetic
sequence of the virus. So it was actually on a call to name Volta, who's my boss, at Optum Labs
and Health Group. And she said, Daniel, you know, if your mother was in one of these states that
does not have good surveillance, and she got COVID, would you want to give her the monotherapy,
or would you want to give her the cocktail? And, you know, so we'll call that the mother test.
And the mother test was, no, I would want my mother to get the cocktail. I think everyone
should get the cocktail. Clearly, and David Ho sort of heads up about this, we're seeing
the sequences in New York City, maybe a third or more. And that's actually from March 10th
when he emailed me. We're already having resistance mutations that would suggest a lack of efficacy
to bambling of a map. And we're seeing increasing rates around. So it's really a switch over to
cocktails. We're going to go even a little more detail here, right, is the ID Society of America
has now embraced monoclonal antibody therapy. But what have they embraced? It's very specific.
They've embraced therapy with Eli Lilly cocktail, with bamlinivumab and a test of a map based upon
those phase three trial results showing 87% reduction in progression, and that impact on
mortality as well. So this last week was a challenge, right? Because the Catholic hospitals were the
first ones to have cocktails. So we were flooding them. We had some pretty bad experiences with
people waiting six, seven hours, sort of a monoclonal antibody line to get the cocktails,
because we were not wanting them to get monotherapy with bam bam until everyone had switched over
to cocktails. So fortunately, I think we are by the time this drops, we will have made the
conversion across all over the place. So sort of tip my hat to everyone, sort of switching and
doing what needed to be done to make this happen. All right. And now this is, I'm going to hopefully
make this not as long as my other ones. We're going to spend a little bit of time on the tail
phase before we go into our fundraiser and answer some emails. So I mentioned recently that things
have been getting better and better with vaccination. But one of the things that has not been
getting better is we're seeing lots and lots of COVID positive kits. And now what's getting a
lot of attention is not just what we heard from the UK in terms of numbers, but we're hearing more
and more stories. We're hearing more and more focus on children getting COVID and then not getting
better. We don't know the exact percentages. I think I mentioned before, I don't want to hang
my hat yet on what percent of children at what age end up with long COVID. But it is clearly
more than we want to get long COVID. And the number of stories, the number of experiences
that are being shared are growing. So this is going to have to factor into that discussion.
I don't want to oversell this. I want to try to basically say this is what the science is.
We know that children are at low risk of hospitalization. We know that children at low risk of death.
We know that children are at lower risk seemingly for long COVID. But though children are at lower
risk, they're not at no risk. So as we learn more and more about this, I think this needs to be
part of that decision about letting the kids go back to school, letting the kids get back
into all these activities, just realizing that you can't just say, oh, it doesn't matter if a child
gets COVID because there can be consequences. So all right, as promised, I didn't keep people
too long. But I do want to bring people to sort of my vision that I am concerned about.
So I'm going to encourage everyone to go to parasiteswithoutporters.com and help us
continue to support the American Society of Tropical Medicine. We're trying to create these
scholarships, these annual meeting travel awards, for we're hoping to bring three women
from economically challenged parts of the world to the annual meeting, trying to sort of help
push them forward. I think it's really critical that we don't leave the rest of the world behind.
What I fear is this sort of dystopian vision I have. It's December 4th, it's July 4th.
We're celebrating Independence Day in the United States. We have massive numbers of people vaccinated.
We're having our small gathering barbecues in the backyard, but still thousands of people
are dying per day in many other parts of the world. So as we move, I think at a really good
pace here towards vaccinating people here in the United States. I am glad to hear that we already
have plans as we vaccinate people here to share those vaccines, to get those vaccines out to the
rest of the world. So let's not just worry about ourselves. We're not safe until everyone's safe.
Looking forward to understanding Daniel, how vaccinating resolves long COVID. That's a surprise
to me. Email for Daniel, Daniel at microbe.tv. Martha, question regarding age and COVID vaccine
dose. Does it seem that the elderly might need a larger dose than younger? If so, do you know of
any plans to test this? Similarly, should younger people get a smaller dose? My elderly father has
been asking about this. We'd love to find out the current thinking. It's always shocked me in
medicine. This is the difference between the pediatrician and the adult physician. Once you
turn 18, one size fits all. You could be that 75 pound woman. You could be the 320 pound
man or woman, I guess. It's really amazing to me that we don't individualize that we haven't
studied a lot of our medicines to really adjust. Some of them we have right now that we're using
tosyllism for people that escalate. We clearly use a weight-based dosing. For our anticoagulation,
we use a weight-based dosing. When we're looking at some of our antibiotics, we're actually looking
at how much an individual weighs and we're dosing how many milligrams per kilogram.
Most of our vaccines are one size fits all and the idea is we're going to overdose.
But then we end up with discussions about vaccines. Oh, they work better in the young.
They're less responsive in the older individuals. But we already saw with flu shots, for instance,
maybe adjusting the preparation or the amount actually results in more protection.
I think that's a lesson we've learned from the influenza vaccine story that it is worth looking
at different doses, different formulations, definitely based upon a person's age, but also
based maybe upon a person's size if we think about it. And I think that as we're more interested,
more exciting of vaccines, I'm hoping we learn more about this. I actually remember one of our
discussions when I was having my PhD was about really the difference in the immune system and
the vaccine efficacy in children versus the elderly versus people in sort of between the two.
And I'm supposed to say elderly or older individuals. But no, I think this is an excellent question,
and these are unanswered questions. And if we keep seeing maybe treatment vaccine failures in
people who are older, it might make sense to actually use increased doses in those individuals and
study that. Walter writes, is there any known downside to any of the anti-sars COVID-2 spike
protein vaccines for older kidney patients who do not yet require dialysis? I imagine vaccination
produces at least some antibodies against the ACE2 spike protein complex that could engender
cross reactivity against ACE2 receptors, the heart kidney and lungs are rich in those.
I noticed that kidney patients were not included in the original Pfizer biotech or Moderna vaccine
trials and have wondered why. Yeah, they weren't. That's a good observation. They have been clearly
included in the millions of people that are now being vaccinated. So we have good experience
in this population. They tend to be tolerating the vaccines very well. We're not seeing any
safety concerns. So if someone has kidney problems, even if they're on dialysis, we're not seeing
concerns. So dialysis, no dialysis. If you've got a place to get that vaccine, go ahead and get that
vaccine. All right, one more from Thomas. Our facilities are beginning to revisit policies for
pre-operative SARS-CoV-2 testing, as well as reconsidering wait times in our ORs after aerosol
generating procedures. For roughly the last year, we've been testing all our elective surgical
patients within 72 hours of their procedures and asking them to isolate following their testing
until day of surgery to reduce both the risks associated with an infected patient coming to
this hospital surgery center and spreading SARS-CoV-2 and more importantly, the risks of increasing
complications with a patient to have pre-op COVID-19, perioperative. Additionally, we have had
various wait times after both intubation, extubation or other aerosolizing procedures,
depending on air exchange rates. Proposals are to one, eliminate pre-op testing in fully vaccinated
patients to decrease or eliminate wait times after AGPs of patients are either vaccinated or have
tested negative. The latter certainly goes against our current practice. Since all elective cases
for the last many months would have had negative pre-op tests and we currently do wait for the
requisite number of air exchanges prior to opening the rooms up. The vast majority of the staff has
been fully vaccinated since early to mid-February, so risk of serious disease in our staff shouldn't
really be the concern. Since some facilities have 14-minute pre and post wait, you can imagine
efficiency isn't what it was pre-pandemic. Admittedly, item one goes against your mantra
never miss an opportunity to test, but I suspect the risks are at least markedly reduced. Given
the current CDC recommendations regarding travel for vaccinated people, it sounds like data still
lacking to definitively be say vaccinated individuals can't transmit to other people. Curious if you
and your crew have any thoughts on these proposed changes. Do you have any thoughts on if there
is an ideal time to schedule a COVID-19 vaccination either before or after a planned elective surgery?
We have administrators and high proclaiming patients shouldn't receive a vaccination for 14 days before
or after the scheduled surgery. I've heard surgeons proclaim you could get a fever from the vaccine
and might mimic a surgical side infection. And similarly, others have worried about side effects
mimicking COVID and leading to postponement. I tend to err on the side of never miss an
opportunity to vaccinate. So that was a lot there. That was like a that was like a
Twip email, right? So let me pick the winners out. Maybe I'll go in reverse order and then I'll
like remember as I go. So one of the things that definitely has been an issue is surgeons do not
like us vaccinating anywhere around when they might be doing surgery, particularly the cancer
surgeons. They're all worried that if we vaccinate particularly with an mRNA vaccine, particularly in
the field, let's say you've got a woman who has breast cancer in her left breast and you're going
to stick an mRNA shot into the left deltoid and then potentially have the enlarged lymph nodes
that we clearly see. That might be an issue when they want to do lymph node dissection,
sentinel, lymph node sampling, all these other things. And then that actually is reasonable.
And this is complicated, right? So it can be very hard on a
Twip to give the full answer. But yeah, there certainly are circumstances where I would defer
that vaccine. I know that breaks my rule, but never missed a chance to immunize. Yeah, there
are times when you're not missing the opportunity, you're moving that opportunity to a different
time. Now we have started in the New York area, giving the J and J vaccine to a lot of patients
before they leave. I do not think you need to wait a full 14 days. Much seems to be a much lower
incidence of fever and tolerance issues. So in this case, I actually have a patient right now.
She's in the hospital. She had a biopsy for her breast cancer. And we're actually going to go
ahead and give her the J and J vaccine in the opposite arm before she leaves. And I think that
this is going to have to be sort of an individual thought out. But I actually would not want there
to be this hard and fast rule for any vaccine. If someone's planning on a hernia operation and
they've got a chance to get a vaccine and it's 13, 12, 11 days before, I'm not sure we want to have
too many barriers. We want to get those people vaccinated. Because unfortunately,
when they come into a healthcare setting, we, sorry to say, have had exposure events.
And so I think we want to be careful. We don't want to have rigid rules there.
Now, the next is about testing. Hey, we have more and more testing capacity. We have quicker
turnaround. Those whole ideas about getting your test 72 hours ahead of time were in large part
based upon testing delays. If anything, I think we can ramp this up and have the day before
get a test and have results available in time for that surgery. We really do not want people
coming in, bringing them into healthcare settings, potentially exposing people who are
immunocompromised, who maybe wanted to get vaccinated, but didn't have an opportunity to.
I know we're all vaccinated, healthcare workers who wanted to. But a lot of our patients have
not been vaccinated. And I think that's going to be an issue for a while either through choice
or because they have an issue with an immune system failing. So I think we still have a
commitment to try to keep our healthcare settings as safe as possible. It was related a story today.
Unfortunately, where one of my good friends, his son had a skiing accident. They went to a hospital
near the ski mountain. They wanted to do a CAT scan because they were concerned about head trauma.
And the dad asked, well, why is this taking so long? And they said, oh, we just had a person
in the CT scanner with COVID. We're just going to give it a few more minutes before we put
your son in there. Five days later, the son started feeling poorly. He started feeling poorly.
The wife started feeling poorly. That was the only exposure they could really think about was
all that time spent in a healthcare setting. So we got to keep those places safe. It's a small
price to pay to continue to test to keep these places safe. And not only is a small price to say,
I'm going to say it's going to destroy the confidence. People are going to fear going to
healthcare settings if we can't keep them safe for them. I think that was most of it.
Yeah, I think that's great. All right, that's COVID-19 clinical update number 54 with Dr. Daniel
Griffin. Thank you, Daniel. My pleasure is always on everyone. Be safe. We're coming to the end of
this. You do not want to get sick now. There's lots of virus out there. We're sitting on a pretty
high plateau. Get vaccinated. Don't get COVID. Stay positive, but stay negative.
