This week in virology, the podcast about viruses, the kind that make you sick.
From Microbe TV, this is Twiv, this week in virology, episode 735 recorded on March 25th, 2021.
I'm Vincent Draconiello, and you're listening to the podcast All About Viruses.
Joining me today from New York, Daniel Griffin. Hello, everyone. How's it going this week, Daniel?
We are sitting on this plateau that we seem unable to get off of. As quickly as we vaccinate,
everything opens back up, so it's a constant battle. And I have to say, that's the good news,
right? Because around the world, the numbers seem to be increasing. So, here we are a year into
this, and over a year into this, and we are not where we need to be. But let's be honest,
I was listening to another podcast that said I was cheating on you, listening to other people's
podcasts. It's okay. And it was actually Anthony Fauci was talking, it was 1984.
And he was saying, we have the virus, we know the sequence, I expect to get back to you within
the year with a cure and a vaccine. And I was like 16 plus 37 years ago. So, this is miraculous,
right? Then we went in less than a year from a sequence to a vaccine. But it's not miraculous.
This is science. This is all that, did I say basic science that we spent all this money
investing in? My quotation, every great dream begins with a dreamer. Always remember, you have
within you the strength, the patience and the passion to reach for the stars to change the world.
And that was Harriet Tubman. And I think maybe that's sort of appropriate with what we were
just saying. This really has been tremendous over the last year to go from identifying that
some people are dying from a strange illness unidentified to understanding the etiology
to a really impressive vaccine. We haven't done quite so well in other measures as far as
therapeutics, but the vaccine has really been quite impressive. So I'll make sure I spend a
little time talking about that today. But my rules never miss an opportunity to vaccinate,
never miss an opportunity to test, never waste a vaccine dose. So I'm going to title today's
episode, school shots and cocktails. I'm not sure how schools fit in with the shots and cocktails,
but the shots and cocktails I call is the Irish method for ending the pandemic.
So there have been a few ID society, ID essay, ID society of America updates.
So I'm going to sort of pepper those in as we get there. But there also were some nice
reports from the CDC on schools. So in our section, children and COVID, let's start there.
I mentioned last week that I was not particularly impressed with the Massachusetts study. That was
the three six foot study. That was not even quite observational. But I did intimate that there was
good data out there, and that we had the suggestion that we would be getting more of it and the CDC
delivered on their promise. The MMWR, COVID-19 in primary and secondary school settings,
during the first semester of school reopening, Florida, August through December 2020.
So this was a report looking at close to 3 million registered students that were enrolled in approximately
6,800 public charter and private K through 12 schools range from a small size, maybe 707
to over 300,000 students per school district. And most of these schools had actually resumed
in-person instruction sometime during August of 2020, except for those in two of the largest
school districts. Broward and Miami-Dade, which began remote learning in August, but did not resume
in-person instruction until October 9th and then November 10th, respectively.
Statewide, as of September 24th, almost half 45% of registered students received full-time
in-person instruction. So really, the question here was, how did that go? So to assess the occurrence
of COVID-19 in the Florida schools after resumption of in-person instruction, the CDC and the Florida
Department of Health reviewed school-related cases and outbreaks during August through December
of 2020. And the County Health Department's staff members conducted case investigations
and contact tracing for all COVID-19 cases. So this was, I have to say, there was a lot of rigor
here. They were really looking into this and they found that fewer than 1% of registered
students were identified as having school-related COVID-19. So significant findings were that most
of the identified cases in this age group were not school exposure-related. And I know I've brought
this up on some talks. Parents get upset when I suggest that perhaps the children are safer in
the schools than sometimes they are at home. But it is not apparent in common. It's that your child
is home all day socially isolated. There's a tendency for the kids then to get together after
that period of remote learning. One of the comments here is that masks being mandated
was associated with less transmission. And that was a p-value of less than 0.01. And the other
thing that was a predictor was community case rates. So once community case rates started to go up,
this was associated with a higher risk. And that had an even more significant p-value of less than
0.01. There was another study. And actually, I've been a few, but just to highlight another one,
low SARS-CoV-2 transmission in elementary schools, Salt Lake County, Utah, December 3, 2020 through
January 31, 2021. And here, there were very similar findings, including low school associated
transmission with high mask adherence and classroom seat separation of three feet apart.
So I know here in, I have to say right here in North Shore of Long Island, our schools are
getting ready to open up for fall in person next month in April. They're looking at the three feet.
And as I mentioned, the three feet is something that's really required for getting people back
to fall in person school. Very few parts of our country have the real estate, the size,
the space to do six foot spacing. And the data I suggested last time is you get about E percent
of the benefit at three feet. You get down to 90% reduction by six feet, but you get most of that
bang for the buck in the first three feet. You couple that with masks, you couple that with
upgraded ventilation systems. You add testing. And I think that this, again, this is something
that can be done at low risk. So we're getting more data. This is a science driven recommendation.
Testing, the CDC updated its guidance on testing. So I know there's been a lot of focus on vaccines.
And we've forgotten about our poor tests, but there are key points in the updated recommendations.
So one, they said persons with signs or symptoms of COVID-19 should have diagnostic testing.
I know there's a tendency to give out the presumptive diagnosis, but we really want to confirm these.
And so the CDC is really saying, get people tested, document what's going on here.
Rapid point of care, serial screening can identify asymptomatic cases and helped interrupt SARS-CoV-2
transmission. They're going to say this is especially important when community risk or
transmission levels are substantial or high. And this sort of goes into that frequency.
And rapid results are really critical. What gets us into trouble are these resulting delays. They
really have in the CDC coming out here really endorsing the use of rapid point of care tests.
These are being used so by clinicians across the board and then making a judgment. If it's
positive and it makes sense, great. If it's negative and doesn't make sense, looking at PCR,
looking at make decisions about isolation, quarantining, etc. The selection and interpretation
of SARS-CoV-2 tests should be based on the context in which they are being used, including the
prevalence of SARS-CoV-2 and the population being tested. So testing gets a little sophisticated,
as we've talked about. There's negative and positive predictive values, which are maybe more
important than sensitivity and specificity as really sensitivity, specificity need to be
brought into the context of prevalence, which ultimately tells you when a test is positive or
negative, how confident can you be in that result? And then this, I think, is really important. I
get this question quite a lot. So it's nice to get the CDC putting up something on this prior
receipt of an mRNA COVID-19 vaccine will not affect the results of SARS-CoV-2 viral tests.
All right, a lot of people ask that. So I've been vaccinated, so can I even look at the test
results? And yes, you can. You can still count on these. And I will say that there is now about
$10 billion available for K through 12 schools to expand the coronavirus screening of staff and
students. And I think this was a quote, but this funding could be used for schools to offer
rapid antigen tests that generate results in 15 minutes, allowing schools to quickly respond
when students or staff test positive for the virus. And finally, our article identifying
optimal COVID-19 testing strategies for schools and businesses, balancing testing frequency,
individual test technology, and cost was published. It was actually was interesting. It was under
embargo until about 2 p.m. today. So I couldn't talk about this until, well, a few hours before
Vincent and I recorded this, but now it's fair game once this gets dropped. But this article is
an open access article in plus one. And what we're doing is trying to create paradigms,
some sort of guidance on how people can use testing in the school and actually really any
opening plan that they might have. I've been getting a lot of questions and really goes back to
the variant thing. And the question I've got lately is whether a person infected with a variant
will still have a positive COVID PCR. So I'll cover this here in the testing section. And when I
when I get this question, I usually say yes, but then I walk through the technology of the tests.
And I point out that many of the COVID PCR tests, which really should be SARS-CoV-2 PCR tests,
go to Quest or LabCorp. The Quest PCR primers target nucleic capsid. The LabCorp PCR test says
one primer set targeting nucleic capsid and another targeting the RNA dependent RNA polymerase
sequence. Therefore, a change in the sequence of the spike protein should not impact this test.
In addition to the logic here, this has actually been studied in both Quest and LabCorp have come
out saying that, yeah, this understanding translates into reality and that these tests
continue to be sensitive and specific despite changes in the sequence of the spike protein.
So as I say, the test still gives you a positive result, even if your infection is with a variant,
but it does not tell you whether this positive result is detecting that you have or do not have
a variant. And unfortunately, we still are doing very limited amounts of sequencing,
so we don't quite have the robust surveillance that actually is probably important for monoclonals
when we get there. Okay, active vaccination. I've got a few questions I get hit with,
so I'm going to put them out here. Can a person get COVID after the vaccine? The answer is yes,
but it is much less likely. And when they do, they tend to do much better. We actually have
some pretty robust data really suggesting that the vaccines are impacting not only symptomatic,
but also asymptomatic and certainly severe or critical disease. If I had COVID, how long should I
wait to get my vaccine? The CDC and I, on the same page on this, we recommend no minimal interval.
As soon as you feel well, go get that vaccine. You don't want to go out during the first 10
days, right? You're in isolation, but as soon as that isolation ends, as soon as you start feeling
better, get yourself scheduled, get out there. If I get COVID after my first shot,
should I still get my second shot? And again, this goes back to the same thing.
As soon as you feel better, you can go ahead and get that second dose, you know, wait your 10
days of isolation. So you're not going to the vaccine center, getting everyone sick and infected.
Most of the sites have a manage my appointment feature online. So you can actually go in and
push that off a little if you're 10 day isolation, if your symptoms mean that there's going to be
a little bit of a delay here. If I had long COVID or had COVID before, should I get that second shot
of the two shot vaccines? This can get a little complicated, but I'm going to say we do recommend
two shots for everyone. And of note, we're hearing more reports. I'm going to cover one here today,
that improvement in long COVID often doesn't come until after that second shot. Certainly,
if someone has a anaphylactic or an autoimmune or a concerning reaction, then whether or not you
get a second shot should be a decision made in consultation with a specialist. But in general,
the answer is get that second shot. Do vaccines prevent asymptomatic SARS-CoV-2 infection?
And I'll say here, although we have good data, vaccines prevent symptomatic and severe COVID.
That's really going to be ending this pandemic is really going to depend a large part
on the impact on asymptomatic infection and transmission. As we know that about 50% of the
transmission is probably done by either pre or asymptomatic individuals. So we are getting more
information suggesting that it prevents asymptomatic infection as well. All right, we have another
paper here, impact of COVID-19 vaccine on asymptomatic infection among patients undergoing
pre procedural COVID-19 molecular screening. This was published in CID and goes right at that
issue. So these are asymptomatic individuals who are being tested as a pre procedural screen.
So this group conducted a retrospective cohort study of consecutive asymptomatic adult patients
and N of 39,156. This was done within a large healthcare system here in the United States.
They underwent over 48,000 pre procedural SARS-CoV-2 molecular screening tests,
December 17 through February 8, 2021. They compared individuals who had received at least one dose
of the mRNA COVID-19 vaccine versus those that had not. And they looked at the relative risk of a
positive SARS-CoV-2 molecular test among these asymptomatic persons. And then they adjusted the
relative risk. They found that compared to unvaccinated individuals, the risk of asymptomatic SARS-CoV-2
detection was lower among those greater than 10 days after the first dose. Their relative risk
was 0.21. I think this is critical here. This is suggesting an 80, almost an 80% production
in the risk of an asymptomatic infection, which is interesting. How do we define infection if
you've got infected, but no symptoms. But also we are seeing, right? As we translate this,
we have vaccinated millions of individuals, which means an 80% reduction means we are still seeing
lots of people who are PCR positive after their vaccines. And as I mentioned before,
the experience we're seeing is they tend to do quite well. And I think the science and experience
support that. Now, I mentioned briefly on the last twib this observation that we're seeing this. So
just to sort of give you the real world mixed with what we're seeing in the literature.
The question of are vaccines safe in patients with long COVID a prospective observational study?
This was posted as a preprint by group out of the UK. And this is looking at that issue of
vaccine impact on long COVID. And you can see here, they're really going into this with the
question of, is it going to be safe? Are they going to be OK? Will there be harm?
And this group looked at patients that had COVID-19 severe enough to require hospitalization,
who then went on to develop long COVID. And as I'll talk later, that's a minority.
Most people with long COVID never were sick enough to end up in the hospital.
They looked prospectively at 44 vaccinated participants and 22 matched unvaccinated
participants and assessed them at a medium of 30 median of 32 days post vaccination.
These were mostly people with severe or highly symptomatic long COVID out about eight months
after acute infection. And they reported that 23.2% reported an increase in symptom resolution
versus 15.4% in the unvaccinated with a p-value of 0.035 in just this small sample size. They
reported no obvious difference in response between mRNA vaccination versus ad no viral vector vaccination.
So it's nice to actually start to have some science here instead of lots of building anecdotes.
This is encouraging and does seem in line what we've been hearing from patients,
a physician or post COVID recovery clinics and support groups, but still a few caveats, right?
This study only looked at post first dose improvement. So I wouldn't hang my hat on the percent
reporting improvement. As we're hearing, as I mentioned before, that some do not report
improvement until after their second dose or farther out with the one dose J and J vaccine.
This is also a small sample size with really short follow up. So we do not know much about
the long term as far as the durability of this reported improvement. But this study does support
the safety of vaccination for people even with severe long COVID. And there is here this
suggestion of possible benefit AstraZeneca vaccine, the white elephant in the vaccine room.
We got a press release reporting the results of the AstraZeneca U.S. Phase III trial demonstrating
statistically significant vaccine efficacy of 79% at preventing symptomatic COVID-19 and 100%
efficacy at preventing severe disease and hospitalization. A lot of people got really excited.
Anthony Fauci said this is fantastic, but maybe not. I liken this to someone's getting measured
and you notice they're standing on their tippy toes. It may be 76% at preventing symptomatic.
But we heard I think some disturbing news that maybe they had cherry picked. Maybe they had not
presented the most up to date data. It's a little disturbing because the thing we really care about
is this vaccine that keeps people from dying from ending up in the hospital. That data has
continued to be very clear. This other sort of competitive number, you know, what's the number
for mild disease, whether it's 76, whether it's 79, would have been better if this data had been
presented better. It's unfortunate here because this is really a great vaccine from a physician
standpoint. This is easy to use. It can be stored, transported, handled at normal refrigeration
conditions for out to about six months. It doesn't need any kind of preparation before you administer.
So it's a much easier vaccine for us. But as we heard, the data safety monitoring board notified
everyone that this data was not quite the data that we wanted it to be. So I will return to
the AstraZeneca vaccine when all the information is available for the FDA review and we have a
chance to go through the data. So just want to sort of remind everyone here, we're not just
oh, call it a vaccine and we're pro, we're going to be honest. And when something like this happens,
we're going to share that as I'm doing here now. Passive vaccination. This is the monoclonal antibodies,
really good uptake of the monoclonal antiviral cocktails. And we continue to see excellent results.
This is now part of the IDSA guidelines. But what exactly did the guidelines say? They advocate
for the use of BAM linibimab and the test of a map together in outpatients with mild to moderate
disease who are at high risk for progression to severe disease and say that CASA ribimab,
MDivimab, may have a similar clinical benefit, but the data are currently limited. Well, I have
to say in the days of COVID, the concept of living guidelines is presented with lots of challenges
as we live in a day of the days of the fire hose of information. And this week, Tuesday,
March 23rd, Regeneron released the data from their phase three trial as promised. So I feel like
these guidelines need to be rapidly updated. These results from Regeneron were from a phase
three randomized control trial looking at treatment in infected non-hospitalized patients,
4,567 in this trial. They met the primary endpoint of showing that the Regeneron COV,
so this is the Regeneron cocktail with the CASA ribimab and MDivimab significantly reduced the
risk of hospitalization or death by 70% with the low dose, 71% with the higher dose compared to
placebo. And the p-values for high and low dose were either 0.0024 or less than 0.001.
No safety issues were observed. So I think the data is becoming really, really compelling for
the impact of this approach, the monoclonal cocktail approach. What was really interesting,
I have to say in this press release and looking forward to the published data is they actually
provided a table of neutralization data looking at several variants from different regions of
the world. They tested key substitutions and actually showed that this therapy based on this
data would continue to be effective. So we've moved to cocktails, I think as I mentioned across the
across the country. So vaccine shots and monoclonal cocktails for everyone. The early
inflammatory phase, we have a little bit of information here. There was a paper aspirin use
is associated with decreased mechanical ventilation, intensive care unit admission,
and in hospital mortality in hospitalized patients with coronavirus disease 2019 was published in
the journal of anesthesia and analgesia. This was a retrospective observational cohort study,
right? So we got to put that in that context. They looked at COVID-19 patients admitted to
multiple hospitals in the United States between March and July of 2020. And the authors looked
back through the medical records, basically identifying who was on aspirin, who wasn't on
aspirin, and then they tried to adjust. But I want to point out this was not a randomized,
blinded prospective trial. They ultimately looked at 412 patients, 314, about 76% not getting
aspirin, 98 patients who are about 24% did get aspirin. And they reported seeing that patients
getting aspirin were less likely to end up needing to be transferred to the ICU, less likely to
end up needing mechanical ventilation, and less likely to die well in the hospital. And they did
not report any significant increase in bleeding complications. So just to put this in context,
this is not a prospective randomized control trial, but sort of interesting attention on the
possible role of aspirin. And here again, in this section, the early inflammatory phase,
the IDSA has updated its guidelines and is now recommending that tosyllism apps should be
used in hospitalized patients who are sick enough to have progressed severe or critical COVID-19.
But a note is that this is an add-on to steroid therapy. All right, we actually have a bunch
today on the long COVID, the post-acute sequelae COVID-19. So there was a really nice review,
post-acute COVID-19 syndrome that was published in Nature Medicine. And there really was so much
here that I'm going to actually say people should sit down, read this once, twice, three times.
They have a really nice box summary of the post-acute COVID-19 issues by Oregon system.
So they go through all the pulmonary issues, hematological, cardiovascular, neuropsychiatric,
renal, endocrine, GI dermatologic, and then even have a little section on the Miss C.
So this is excellent. And I think as we're working with these patients in our long COVID,
our post-acute COVID recovery centers, this is actually a helpful paper for realizing that
it actually takes a team to help these individuals. The neurologist might jump in with a lot of the
severe headaches, which seem vascular, migraine type. Pulmonary is critical, cardiology.
There's a lot of complexity here. We also saw COVID-19 survivors reports of the timing,
duration, and health impacts of post-acute sequelae of SARS-CoV-2, P-A-S-C infection was
posted as a preprint. Now, this was a very interesting paper in that the participants in the study
are members of long COVID support groups. And I think this represents an exciting development
whereby citizen scientists are working together with data and other scientists to try to understand
the challenges, the needs and characteristics of these people suffering from long COVID or
what's now termed post-acute sequelae of SARS-CoV-2. I mean, very interesting and consistent with my
experience are the described stages or waves of this post-acute COVID experience. With this early
wave with neurological and cardiovascular manifestations, then a second wave with skin
manifestations such as COVID toes, hair loss, and then this final wave of symptoms during which the
fatigue just continues to be ongoing. So, I think that this is sort of, I think, nice for
clinicians who are taking care of these patients to see how the patients are describing this
experience. I think it helps for the patients as well to speak to a clinician that has had the
ability to sort of understand this. There's a lot of validation for the patients here
when you can sort of be almost anticipating where they are in this process and what the
challenges might be at that time. I mean, there certainly are limitations here. I mean,
one is that this was predominantly white women since the participants come from online support
groups. There's a certain amount of selection, so this isn't a random sample. But one of the things
I was going to say, I've heard several times where clinicians look at people with long COVID and
they say, you know what, these people are doing much better than the average ICU survivor. If I
was in the ICU and survived, I'd rather have long COVID than something else. And what I like to point
out here, and this was very clear from the paper, is that 84% of these people who are doing so well
compared to someone who spent a month in the ICU never were even hospitalized. A lot of these
individuals started off with a mild or even asymptomatic acute COVID. And here they are
many, many months later looking a little bit better than someone who was in the ICU for sepsis or
something else. Also another paper, persistent neurological symptoms and cognitive dysfunction
in non-hospitalized COVID-19 long haulers. This was published in the Annals of Clinical and
Translational Neurology. So they reported other results from this was a prospective study of 100
consecutive patients, SARS-CoV-2 laboratory positive, and then they had a 50 laboratory
negative control group. And these individuals presented to a neuro COVID-19 clinic.
So due to early pandemic testing limitations, patients were included. If they were never
hospitalized for pneumonia or hypoxemia and had neurological symptoms lasting over six weeks.
So this is sort of a snapshot of those people who never ended up in the hospital but had a
neurological issue that required attention. And they reported that the main neurological
manifestations were, I think this will sound familiar to people, brain fog was reported
81% that feeling that you just can't think clearly. 68% were reporting headaches. And as I've mentioned
a lot of these headaches actually seem like the intractable vascular migraine severe headaches.
Numbness tingling, 60%. Disguysia, 59%. And nausea, 55%. Myalgia, 55%. And the overwhelming,
85% had this ongoing fatigue. And they exhibited impaired quality of life in cognitive and
fatigue domains. And the patient performed worse attention and working memory cognitive tests
compared to that control population and a demographically matched US population. So
I think this points out what's really upsetting to a lot of us just how many of these patients
are continuing to suffer. So let me close on there, leave a little time for emails. But just
ask everyone for their continued support. And thank you so much for all the support we're
continuing to get. We are going to continue to support the American Society for Tropical Medicine
and Hygiene. And we're going to, it looks like we're going to succeed in being able to donate
enough money for three travel awards, bringing early career women from low income parts of the
world to come to the fall annual American Society for Tropical Medicine meeting. So thank you for
continuing to support our work. Okay, it's time for some email. You can send yours to danielatmicrobe.tv.
The first is from John Mascola, who is the director of the Vaccine Research Center at NIH.
John writes, I love Twiv. I listen every week. And as an ID doc that does mostly research,
I also appreciate the COVID clinical updates. So glad to help out Dr. Dan Griffin regarding
one question that is in my wheelhouse where he did not know the answer immunogenicity
of COVID vaccines and older subjects. There are published data showing mRNA is similarly
immunogenic across age groups. So good news. And John provides a link for that. It'll be in
the show notes. Thank you, John. I think this is great. I mean, this just sort of reinforces that
this is not actually just a one man show. I mean, I get a lot of support from my colleagues.
And I love this. I love getting emails. And you know, you can send them either directly to me
or this is even better. Send them to, you know, Daniel at Microbe TV. And yeah, this is this
is great. There's a lot of information. And thank you so much, John, for for sending this in.
Yeah, if you send them to Daniel at Microbe TV, then many more people will get the answer rather
than just you. That's better. Yeah, that makes my life easier. Send them to Daniel at microbe.tv.
So Paul in the University of Manchester in the UK wants to know if you can comment on the
AstraZeneca vaccine, specifically the clotting issues and wonders if he should be taking aspirin
around the time of vaccination. Yeah, I mean, so I actually appreciate the fact that you wrote this
and if you look at the data here, right, it looks like the incidence what 30 and about that many
million people vaccinated, you know, one in a million, which is actually not higher than we see
as a background in the population, almost seems lower to be honest. So I think that we've sort
of come down with not thinking that there's any kind of clotting complication associated with
the vaccine. But I don't think the AstraZeneca has done such a great job of instilling confidence.
So I will weigh in and say, I do not think this is an issue. I'm not going to recommend taking
aspirin around the vaccine. I actually think this vaccine is effective. I think it's safe,
but it just maybe wasn't quite as effective with a few percentage points off of what they were
trying to suggest. Anne is treating a patient, a 77 year old patient got her first vaccine on
March 6th, and then 38 was found unresponsive and finally had a diagnosis of encephalopathy with
possible seizure. So Anne wants to know what to do. The family is quite apprehensive about the
patient receiving the second vaccination never has allergic reactions. Only medical intolerance
is myalgia on statin therapy. I'm inclined to have the patient receive the second vaccination,
but wondered if you had a different response. So this is a tough one, I have to say. This
falls into this category where, you know, I think this is going to have to be an individual decision
where you look at the situation and you're going to have to try to parse out. Do you think this
encephalitis was a vaccine reaction? You know, we certainly, I think I related the story of this.
I had a gentleman who developed an autoimmune reaction. Really, it was a really a multi-inflammatory
type syndrome with his natural COVID infection. And he had issues with his vision to plopia.
And then when he got his vaccine, he actually seemed to have recurrence and responded very
quickly to steroids and IVIG. So, you know, we talk about these are agents that have efficacy,
that have effects on the human body. So I think that this is not going to be a very easy decision.
So Anne, I'm glad you're making it and not me. But yeah, you're going to, I think you probably
want to reach out to your local ID, your local allergy immunology. Really, make sure that we're
giving the best advice here. So this is complicated. All right.
Last one is from Anthony from Brown University Medical School, who's a family physician,
encountered a scenario this week, confused about despite the benefit of your teaching.
I was involved in the care of an elderly woman who lives in the community, but his homebound
has home health aides. Unfortunately, one of her aides tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 last week.
On the day that this patient received her second mRNA vaccine, four days later, the patient
has now tested positive, but is asymptomatic. She clearly meets criteria for eligibility for
monoclonal antibody based on her age. The conundrum is she's also probably derived some protection
from developing COVID from her nearly completed vaccine series. And there would be a theoretical
concern about the passive immunization provided by monoclonal therapy,
blunting her own immune response. We decided to get her treated, prioritizing short-term gains
in a patient at risk. What would you say? So I would treat in this case. And let me just run
through sort of my rule and the thinking. So if someone meets criteria, as we've shared the data,
these are really impressive tools, the monoclonal cocktails. So you take an individual, and you
look at this individually, say, OK, this is a person who is high risk for ending up in the hospital.
If they end up in the hospital, we know that people often don't do very well. The monoclonals are
really going to reduce that chance of progression. And I actually expect someone who's already had
the benefit of the vaccination, the benefit of already starting up to have some sort of a T-cell
response is going to do even better. That's actually I have to say what our experience has been.
What is really the downside? I'm going to sort of ask that question. So you give the person the
monoclonals. OK, maybe that second dose of vaccine doesn't work so well. In three months,
you can probably go ahead and give that second dose again, basically say, OK, I sort of interfered
with its ability to have efficacy. And for that three months while you're waiting,
the person has these monoclonal antibodies at a very high level. They're protected. They're
passively immunized. So basically what you're doing here is you're instantly having this person
immunized by sending them for monoclonals rather than waiting for whatever days for the staff.
And so I do not. We don't in any of our programs use prior vaccination as an exclusion criteria.
If the person ends up getting infected, it's either because it wasn't enough time for them to get
protection. But as we point out, we might do a study of 40,000 people or 20,000 get it. No one
ends up in the hospital. But you translate that into the real world where you're starting to give
this to older individuals. Maybe they have medical problems. Maybe they have an issue
bouncing that protective response. They end up infected with the virus. I would advise jumping
in with these really highly effective therapies. That's COVID-19 clinical update number 55 with
Dr. Daniel Griffin. Thank you, Daniel. Oh, thank you so much. And everyone be safe.
