This week in virology, the podcast about viruses, the kind that make you sick.
From Microbe TV, this is Twiv.
This week in virology, episode 738 recorded on April 1st, 2021.
I'm Vincent Draconiello and you're listening to the podcast all about viruses.
Joining me today from New York, Daniel Griffin.
Hello, everyone.
This is update number 56.
What is the situation this week, Daniel?
Um, you know, it's not good.
Um, and, um, I'm going to go, let me just go right into that.
And then I'll give my quotation.
You know, so I have to say I'm getting tired.
This has really been a tough year and it's disappointing.
You know, we've been asking people just give us a little more time.
Um, and Dr. J Varma, he's a senior advisor for public health at City Hall here in New York.
Um, and I'm going to quote him.
He said, the term I've been using is high plateau.
Um, you know, and I think that's what this is.
We're on this high plateau.
The numbers are not going down.
If anything, the numbers of new cases are climbing, a number of deaths are sitting
at a very unacceptable high.
Um, this, this is not good.
Um, we, we are going to get through this.
Um, in the United States, um, with vaccines, um, but at, I think, an unacceptable number
of, um, of loss and unacceptable number of people sick and, uh, dead and, uh, I'm going
to say, um, disabled after this.
So, so not, not good.
It's, I have to say, if you're not frustrated, if you're not upset, you're not paying attention.
Um, all right.
Let's go with our quotation on that wonderful positive note.
Um, we have two lives, the one we've learned with and the one we live
after that.
And that's by, um, Bernard Malamut.
Um, and I had hoped that at this point, uh, we would be past that learning stage and we would
be moving into, um, sort of addressing this with more wisdom.
But, um, as we're seeing people are, well, I understand I'm exhausted too.
Um, we're tired of, uh, not hugging the ones we love, not, not doing the things we like to do.
We're so close.
And I have to say, um, there's been a lot of predictions, um, of the surge in the, in the fall
and winter, which we saw, um, a little bit of a rise here in the spring, which we are now seeing,
um, and then expecting to end up, um, in a much better place this summer.
Um, but that's the US.
That's for a US centric.
I, I don't want to be so US centric.
Um, and I'll point out the rest of the world, um, is not on the way down.
The rest of the world, Europe even, um, is on the way up.
So, uh, things are not looking good.
We really need to move faster with the vaccines.
Um, and people probably heard we had a little bit of a setback there this week.
One of the things, um, you know, as I go through each week, I'm always trying to, uh,
give all the new information.
Um, but I also want to sort of always counter, you know, what people are seeing, um, you know,
in the press, in the media with what I'm actually seeing on the ground.
Um, and also I feel like it's important that I keep reinforcing, um, the current
treatment approaches because I keep seeing, uh, people, um, not addressing COVID-19 based
upon what we've learned over the, yes, last year.
I sometimes feel like I'm, um, back in March of last year when I see, you know,
someone show up at one of the, say, one of the non-pro-health urgent cares,
and they get a Z-pack and, uh, and a whole bunch of steroids on the second day of illness.
Um, so let's, let's kind of go through this.
So, um, my section, Children and COVID, people go sort of both ways on this.
I am glad that, um, I think I'm getting attention on this.
I'm pointing out that, that Children are at low risk, but that they're not at no risk.
Um, but I wanted to give some, um, perspective to this.
I, I do try to say that it's not just about who died.
It's not just about who ended up in the hospital, um, but let's talk about that.
Um, Children have died here in the US from COVID-19, um, and I actually went before, um,
doing this update, uh, to the most current CDC, um, numbers.
Um, and I, I still remember when I first started talking about this and I was saying, listen,
it's, it's March, um, no child under the age of seven has died of COVID.
Um, well, that's not true anymore.
So if you look at zero to four years in the US, over a hundred Children have died.
Um, if you go to the next five to 17 years, over 200 have died.
And when you go a little bit higher, so this is the 18 to 29, you know, and I have an 18-year-old,
I have a 20-year-old over 2000 have died according to the CDC.
Um, and that's just confirmed.
That's just in the US.
I want to point out, um, those are the numbers.
Um, and that's what we're working with.
And, um, you know, that, that's far too many deaths here in the US already.
And what we're seeing now with the positive cases is we're seeing a shift into the younger
population.
We're seeing, um, as I mentioned, um, with the MISC, um, a higher percent of these
individuals are, um, ending up in the ICU.
One of my colleagues just reached out to me saying where they are 3% of the hospital
admissions are now Children under the age of 18.
This is, this is not good, but now a little bit of positive news.
We heard a nice little, uh, press release, um, that Pfizer, um, has been testing its, um,
vaccine on younger, um, individuals.
And we heard some, uh, data on the 12 to 15-year-old population.
Um, and this was, this was very impressive in participants age 12 to 15 years old.
The Pfizer BioNTech vaccine demonstrated a hundred percent efficacy and robust antibody responses.
Um, actually exceeding the antibody responses of older individuals, the 16 to 25-year-old,
um, population.
And it was very well tolerated.
And they plan to submit, um, both to the FDA and the European, uh,
medicines agency for expansion of their EUA.
Um, they also provided updates on the fact that they are looking at, uh,
children, uh, down to as young as six months of age, so the six months to 11-year-old.
Um, so just to go into just a little bit of weeds, um, this was a press release.
This is not, um, a peer-reviewed publication.
Um, but in this study, they looked at 2,260 adolescents in this 15, in this 12 to 15 years
of age in the United States, and they observed 18 cases of COVID in the placebo group, zero
in the vaccinated group.
So this is that 100% efficacy against infection.
Um, they also reported this robust antibody responses.
So, um, this data will be submitted for peer review publication.
And we have that, um, I will be certain to circle back to it, uh, testing.
Um, you know, I want to keep trying to reinforce testing is a major pillar of the current
strategy, um, to defeat COVID-19.
And, uh, one of the major employers city group has actually set up this three times a week
in home testing for its employees.
Um, they're using this $5 per test, um, approach.
Um, it's a rapid self-administered antigen test.
It's applied by the ANOVA medical group.
Um, and this is one of those, um, lateral flows or those pregnancy type tests that people
might be familiar with, but instead of peeing on it, right?
You're going to swab your nose and you put it in a little bit of fluid and then it runs out.
Um, so actually, uh, this is not just the US as actually speaking to a, uh, friend of mine
and, uh, their colleague in London got their three month kit.
So this is a real commitment there to try to, um, use testing, um, coupled with vaccinations,
coupled with mitigation, everything we could do to, uh, to get on top of this.
Um, the FDA also granted EUA, uh, to an at home, um, over-the-counter molecular nucleic
acid amplification test.
This is called the Q COVID-19.
Um, and this is, uh, I'd say kind of a cute little test.
Um, you get this whole kit with a, uh, single use test cartridge.
Um, and this, uh, sample, sample one, basically you're going to swab up your nose.
Um, you're going to put it in this cartridge.
And then that cartridge is going to go in the Q cartridge reader, um, provided separately.
I felt like I'm like back in the 80s with batteries being supplied separately.
Hopefully the reusable batteries are going to, you know, come with this.
But it's really a battery operated, um, home testing kit.
And this, um, gives you results in about 20 minutes.
So the way they sort of market this is you're going to swab your nose while you're getting
ready in the morning.
Go take your shower, brush your teeth, do whatever, come back, make sure your test is
negative before you, uh, go to work or school or any social activities.
And according to the FDA evaluation, the test correctly identified 96% of the positive samples
from individuals that had symptoms.
And I thought this was a little interesting.
A hundred percent of the positive samples from individuals without symptoms.
So really a very sensitive test for both symptomatic and as we're talking here,
asymptomatic screening, uh, for a return to workplace also, I think it's exciting week for
testing the Amazon real-time RTPCR tests for detecting SARS-CoV-2 also got EUA.
And so the very similar, the Amazon COVID-19 test collection kit includes, um,
a nasal swab, uh, collection, uh, tube, biohazard bag, um, instructions and a sample drop off.
So this is not all being done in the home.
This is really a home collection kit, which is then being sent, um, out to a lab.
Um, also wanted to give an update on our T detect T cell test by adaptive, right?
Uh, this is that test that a physician doesn't order.
So actually the patient will go online, um, they'll type in T dash detect,
and it will pop up the adaptive website where the patient themselves goes through,
answers a bunch of questions, um, gets a blood test, um, which tells whether or
not they're T cells, whether you have memory T cells, um, evident of a prior COVID-19 infection.
And the hope, um, that I discussed before is that those, um, individuals who could not get a PCR
test upfront, who maybe are now serology negative can get this test.
Um, but then comes the question that I've gotten from individuals.
What about, um, someone who's got a vaccine?
Um, and as I mentioned, there are thousands of T cell, um, epitopes that we see, um,
that target, um, the spike protein, but there's also TCRs that target other proteins.
Imagine that there's other proteins.
I hope everyone enjoyed that sort of my, if you listen to the rest of Twiv,
you hear our obsession with the spike protein.
And they're actually looking at modifying the algorithm.
So we will be in the future able to tell whether this is a T cell response purely targeted
at spike or whether this also targeting of other, some of the other proteins will be able to use
this also to distinguish vaccination versus vaccination with prior natural infections.
And we'll spend too much time on this.
There's been a lot in the press about some overcharging of some of the New York City, um,
uh, hospitals with regards to testing, $3,000 per test.
I think this is unfortunate and it undermines confidence in testing.
So, um, I'm glad that this is being brought to light.
This really needs to be corrected.
Um, the CARES Act was supposed to guarantee that individuals could,
at no financial risk, go get tested, find out if they have COVID-19 before they spread it to others.
So, um, I hope this all is, is addressed.
All right, active vaccination, um, you know, I know I started off with some negativity,
but here's some really positive news, um, more data from the CDC MMWR.
And this is all about real world vaccine efficacy.
So, we had the interim estimates of vaccine effectiveness of the BNT162B2,
an mRNA 1273 COVID-19 vaccines,
in preventing SARS-CoV-2 infection among healthcare personnel,
first responders, and other essential and frontline workers,
eight US locations, uh, December 2020 to March 2021.
Um, so really this is how well did those RNA vaccines actually work in the real world?
Um, and in this early release publication, um, they prospectively followed 3,950 healthcare personnel,
first responders, another essential and frontline workers, um, that completed weekly SARS-CoV testing
for 13, um, consecutive weeks.
And under real world conditions, mRNA vaccine effectiveness of full immunization,
so greater than 14 days after second dose was 90% against SARS-CoV-2 infections,
um, regardless of symptom status, um, and just with partial immunization.
So, um, this greater than 14 days after first dose, we were already at 80%.
So, we're seeing a growing amount of real world evidence regarding the safety and effectiveness
of vaccines.
We also had an initial report of decreased SARS-CoV-2 viral load after inoculation with BNT,
162 B2 vaccine, um, and this was published in Nature Medicine, um, the authors here presented
data that the previously was out as a preprint describing that in those that had a positive test,
despite vaccination, the viral loads were about, um, four times lower.
Um, so there was an abrupt change at 12 days after vaccinations that went from an average
CT value of 25 up to 27. So remember this, the higher the CT means it takes more cycles to pick
up the RNA. Um, and so the 25 to 27 was for the RNA dependent RNA polymerase primers.
And this roughly translates, right? This, this wasn't set specifically, but about 600,000,
um, down to 150,000, um, ending use of NAT detectable units are RNA copy numbers.
Um, so even a little more encouraging than that initial data that was posted on GitHub that we
discussed back in February. There also were several letters. This was like the week of, uh,
real world experience of in the New England Journal, um, such as BNT, 162 B2 mRNA COVID-19
vaccine effectiveness among healthcare workers, early evidence of the effect of SARS-CoV-2 vaccine
at one medical center and SARS-CoV-2 infection after vaccination in healthcare workers in California.
Um, and basically we're seeing consistently that the vaccines have excellent efficacy
at preventing severe disease, symptomatic disease, asymptomatic disease. Um, and even in these post
vaccination infections, the viral load appears to be substantially lower, suggesting a major
impact on interrupting transmission. Well, what about lessons learned from the vaccine rollout?
So I've suggested before that instead of focusing on who did what wrong, we should focus on what was
done and how we can learn should this not be the last pandemic. So a big part of the vaccination
issues was the logistics getting of vaccines into arms. Um, so there was actually a really nice
piece in Politico on March 29th, exploring this issue entitled Biden administration remakes vaccine
strategy after mass vaccination sites fizzle. Um, and really just to cut to the chase on this.
Um, once they sort of went to the, say, the traditional approaches, they, they let the
backs, um, the pharmacies start vaccinating. We've really seen an escalation in our ability to do
an incredible number of millions of vaccinations per day. So, um, their comment was that, um,
they're moving towards this, um, towards this approach. I wanted to finish this section with
my question of where's Elvis? Um, I was just in a talk this week where there was a, there was an
update on, um, the polio vaccination experience that was kind of trickling and wrong with an
uptake of about 0.6%. Um, and then along comes Elvis and he gets his vaccination. Um, six months
later, the uptake was up to 80%. So, um, I don't, I don't think we're quite there yet at that
greater than 80%, but I'm hoping that we can all work together to get there. All right, passive
vaccination. Um, you know, I, I like to talk about, um, variants of concern in this section,
because my biggest concern, um, is the impact on monoclonal therapies. Um, and I, I like to feel
that if we were, if we were doing a better job with our behaviors of concern, we would be, um,
in a little less, less trouble here. And we actually have a, um, whole bunch of studies going on
where we're trying to update our, um, our sequencing. So, we have a better sense of where we are with
these, with these issues. Um, and along these lines, we actually got a little more, um,
information in the monoclonal arena. Um, I discussed the data for GSK and VIR biotechnology. Um,
and they've actually gone ahead and filed an application to US regulators for EUA for their
antibody. Um, this was based on the data that I previously discussed where they demonstrated an
85% reduction in hospitalizations for deaths. Um, when their therapy was given in the first
seven to 10 days of COVID-19 infection. Um, now this monoclonal therapy, as I mentioned,
it targets an invariant region of the spike protein. Um, so it isn't something that we're
quite as concerned, um, that the virus will mutate away from as far as efficacy. It also has an
extended half life, uh, may last for up to a year. So we may have broader applications here,
because as we're learning, not everyone can mount a really good response to the vaccines.
Not everyone wants to, um, mount a really good response to the vaccines. Um, so this gives us
one more potential, um, therapy to use not only for, um, acute infections, but potentially for the
prophylaxis opportunity. Um, I got a monoclonal vaccine question here that I thought was entertaining,
but I would share it's informative. Um, so it was one of our pro health internists,
Brooke Keene, um, had this question. Um, and this is, this is coming up more and more. So one of
their patients, 66 years old overweight, high BMI, um, and it's seven weeks after the second dose of
the Pfizer COVID vaccine. They end up exposed to COVID, um, a few days later. Um, and I should say
because, uh, Vincent's exposed to SARS-CoV-2, a person who has COVID-19. Um, and a few days later,
this patient starts to develop respiratory symptoms, gets tested and is, um, has a positive test for
SARS-CoV-2. Um, and due to his age and comorbidities, he's actually treated with monoclonal
antibody, um, therapy. Now he's completely fine at this point. And I have to say, this is an
interesting question. Does he go ahead? Does he need a boost? Does he need to be re-vaccinated?
And this is an area that I think is sort of more of our subtleties, right? For some reason, um,
we do see people who get fully vaccinated who then go on to get infected, right? I mean,
our therapies, our trials were not a hundred percent. Um, so in cases where monoclonals are
given less than two weeks after the second dose, um, you know, and we're seeing this,
I do recommend re-vaccinating, but here the interval is a little bit longer, right? Because
you're waiting for that person to, um, recover and you're waiting that three months. But my advice
in this case was to actually go ahead, um, wait that three months, um, and then evaluate this by
getting anybody levels. And actually, um, that point, hopefully we'll have more information about, um,
giving a third dose or in the case of J and J, maybe a booster dose, uh, to individuals who get
infected, um, despite vaccination, um, the incubation pre-exposure period. Um, I, and you keep reminding
people that tests do not predict the future. There still is this two to 14 day incubation period.
Um, even when we do that early test out option, we're still 20, 30% of people are
becoming symptomatic or becoming, uh, PCR positive after that seven days, right? So we want to,
we want to be careful here. Um, I'll say at least here in the New York, particularly the Nassau
County area, we're about a 5% positivity rate. We are, we are actually above rates where we were
in the, the surge of last summer. This is that critical period of detectable viral replication,
the viral symptom phase. Um, this is when I keep shaking my head when I hear the stories of the
experiences that my patients who get admitted, um, have had at some of the care centers. Remember,
the first seven to 10 days that viral symptom phase, this is the time for monoclonals and
monitoring. This is not the time for steroids. This is not the time for antibiotics. Once you
get into that early inflammatory phase, hopefully all our patients that qualify have gotten monoclonals,
but you get into the early inflammatory phase, your patient is monitoring their oxygen level at
home with a pulse oximeter. If the oxygen saturation drops below 94% at rest, then it's time for
steroids. I noticed a lot of people are giving these med roll dose packs, which is really just a
five day course of steroids. Um, we studied dexamethasone, six milligrams, P O Q day times 10 days.
An equivalent would be prednisone, 40 milligrams, P O Q day times 10 days. Um, I'm going to recommend
we stick, um, as much as we can with what we was, we, we studied. Um, I think the 10 days made sense.
That's why it was studied that way. Um, so let's try to try to do that. It's cheaper than the
med roll dose back by the way. Um, and there are millions of people that are still going to need
this therapy in the coming months. Unfortunately, um, oxygen. Um, that's when we start licking it
oxygen. That's when we start licking it. Anticoagulation. That's when we consider remdesivir. I like to
point out the secondary infection phase is not until week three. So this first admission,
it is very rare for them to end up benefiting from antibiotics. Um, but some of the recent data we
saw is the majority of people with COVID-19 admitted in this country. I was publication in IDSA,
receive a course of antibiotics. Um, so I think, um, this is not going to bode well if that's how
we're approaching this viral disease with overuse of antibiotics. So our next, um, Armageddon will
be antibiotic resistant infections. The multi system inflammatory phase, as I mentioned,
a trend towards more severity, more ICU level care for our kids. Um, this is where you really
have to be careful. You want to have a clear diagnosis and then steroids, IVIG supportive care. Um,
and then the, the tail phase long COVID. Um, and I'm going to say the best treatment we have so far
for long COVID appears to be vaccination. Um, I, I got a, I got a, uh, it's actually a text the
other day from, um, one of my colleagues, Justin Aaron at Columbia. And I thought this was very
entertaining. We're seeing now, um, multiple reports of an increased likelihood of a person
getting better reporting improvement in symptoms with long COVID after vaccination.
Um, and it's with all the vaccines now. Initially we saw it with the mRNA vaccines, but we're seeing
it with AstraZeneca and some other countries. We're seeing it with J&J right here in this country.
Um, I was on the Brian Lares there show and one of the J&J, uh, recipients who had, uh,
resolved symptoms called in very enjoyable. Um, but Justin Aaron was relating an individual
who had gone many months without the ability to smell or taste and now, um, was complaining of a,
of a super sense of smell. Um, and I don't think that, um, a vaccine gives you super smell powers.
I just think this individual had forgotten how smelly the world is. Um, and that was complaining
about going into rooms and being overpowered by the amount of perfume. Um, I have to say,
people are using a little bit more perfume than before. Maybe because everyone's wearing masks
and they're trying to overdo it. And here's someone who now got his sense of smell back. So,
it's encouraging to see these people getting better. There's a real drive for these people with
long COVID to, um, want to get an opportunity to get vaccinated. Um, and we're seeing fortunately
across the country a dropping in the age for eligibility and increase in the supply for the
vaccine. So, um, I think I'm going to end here on what is more of a positive note than I started.
But we're still not quite there. Um, and I do want to say we're very US centric, I think,
because here we have vaccines here. Things are getting better. Um, but a lot of the world is
struggling. Um, this isn't just Asia. This isn't just sub Saharan Africa. This isn't just South
America. Um, this is Europe. This is many places throughout the world. Um, and I'm going to say,
as I conclude, um, thank you so much for all the support today. Um, and continue to go to
parasites without borders.com and support us because we are committed that we are going to give, um,
forty thousand dollars to American Society of Tropical Medicine and hygiene, um, to support
scholarships for early career women from low income countries, uh, to attend this fall meeting,
the American Society of Tropical Medicine, who otherwise would not be able to attend.
All right. It's time for some, uh, email. If you want to send Daniel a question, it's Daniel at
microbe.tv and Christian sent a link to a preprint describing, uh, some of the initial
thrombotic events associated with, uh, AstraZeneca vaccination. And I wondered, Daniel, if you had
any thoughts on the nature of those events and what that means? Sure. You know, it's a challenge.
I'm doing a, I'm going to talk later this week for the G six PD community. Um, and they're quite
concerned about, you know, is there one vaccine that might be safer for people with certain
comorbidities, certain people with, you know, red cell disorders? Um, and I have to say it's
really, it's really tough. Cause as we talked about this, um, the, this is one of those where they
said the preponderance of scientific evidence does not support a connection between these
clocks and vaccination. Uh, the rate is that, which is seen, um, you know, background rates.
So we don't know, but despite that, um, despite it only being about a one in a million phenomenon,
which is what we see in the unvaccinated population. Um, there's a lot of names. There's a lot of
descriptions. There's sort of a timing, right? This is happening seven to 14 days after.
Um, so I sort of leave it there. I, I do not know if this vaccine is causing these phenomenon.
I don't know if this is just something, you know, when you give 30 million vaccines, you see 30
events. Um, you know, we talked about, um, I was like to talk about the dog bite thing, you know,
people who didn't get vaccinated were more likely to get bitten by dogs. I do not think vaccinations
prevent you from getting bitten by dogs. Um, so I do not know. Um, and it'll be interesting to
explore, um, 30 cases is very hard to give you enough evidence to really make a connection or
understand this phenomenon well. Daniel and Denmark, they recommend pulling the syringe back to make
sure you're not in a blood vessel. Is that important to do? Yeah, we do that everywhere.
So actually, um, when I, when I posted my getting my vaccination, it was, uh, the pharmacist was
doing it. I think she maybe she was nervous because she was on camera. Um, but that's what you're
supposed to do to make sure you're in the muscle and not in a blood vessel. You, you put it in,
you draw back a little on the syringe, make sure there's no blood coming back and then you give
your IM injection. So, um, actually we recommend that everywhere. So I know actually that was
specifically the idea that, oh, because if it goes in the blood, maybe that's what triggered
those 30 events. I, I don't think there's a connection there, but yeah, you want to properly
give an IM. Okay. Okay. All right. Emma writes, my mom is on multiple rheumatoid arthritis
medications. And she lists a bunch that suppress her T cells received first Moderna vaccine a few
weeks ago. She did talk to the rheumatologist before vaccination. They did not suggest any
changes to her medication. Now she found out that the American college of rheumatology
recommends stopping a bat test sept one week prior to an one week after the first dose,
but continuing the medication for the second dose. Do you think she will have a strong immune
response to the second dose, even if her first may have been dampened by the RA medication or
would stopping a bad test step to one week before and after the second dose be the best option?
Okay. Well, that's a good sophisticated question. So a bad set is actually a drug we use for
treatment of a lot of autoimmune diseases, ones where we think there's a T cell issue.
And basically you're targeting something called CTLA4, which is a co-stimulatory molecule.
So the question here, right, is we've all learned that it's not just about B cells. It's not just
about antibodies. We want to see a nice robust T cell response. And here is an individual who
actually is on a drug that is interfering with appropriate T cell response. So one of the first
things I always like want people to think about is the pharmacokinetics of this therapy. So you
give a therapy and a lot of people, I think maybe they learned this with tosyllizumab,
you give that therapy and it doesn't just work for one day. There's a certain, you know, at half
life, a period before elimination. And the period, the half life of elimination for this drug is
about two weeks, which is actually interesting when you think about gaps between them. So ideally,
you want to have as much of a gap as you can, but you're balancing this against not treating
the disease. So this is what we're doing a lot of times. We're sort of, you know, I guess
on the fly making these recommendations and we're saying, if you can space this out great,
we definitely recommend people with immunosuppressive conditions. Go ahead and get vaccinated. We are
concerned that they may not get as robust a response as we would like. Yeah, the more you
can space it away from those vaccines, the better. Just think about it. If you space it two weeks
away, you've only gotten down to about half the therapeutic level. So that's, I'm going to sort
of leave this with this is going to have to be a judgment call. The more you can space these
therapies away from either the first or the second shot, the better. So Kim writes, I have two little
ones, two and a half years, 12 months in daycare, three days a week, there have been cases,
though not in their classrooms. It's scary as heck nonetheless. I'm wondering if clinicians will
recommend routine antibody testing for youth at some point. There was a toddler in the center who
had MISC, he's out of the hospital and home. There was an exposure, but never tested positive.
No one can be sure that daycare is where the exposure happened, but timing of MISC was five
weeks after the classroom was quarantined. It's a nerve-racking time to be apparent. I'm hopeful
that the Moderna youth trials will go well. I don't know how I'm going to mentally take another
year of this anxiety. Yeah, I know it's tough. The biggest thing here is when can we get our
younger individuals vaccinated, right? So we're saying we're going to have enough vaccines for all
our 16 and up by the end of May. We anticipate by the time we get it to June. I'm going to try
to be honest. I'm not going to do the underpromise overdeliver. I'm going to do the honest. We hope
by June, we have an extension of the EUA to allow us to get down to our 12-year-olds, right? So 12,
13, 14, 15, in addition to 16 and up. So June, we can really offer vaccinations to that population
June and July. But as we know, we are ongoing trials getting us all the way down to six months.
That's going to be critical. Really, what's more important than antibody testing in most situations
is trying to detect the virus, trying to test as many people. And there really is a big effort
and a lot of finance behind this to more rapid testing in addition to PCR testing. The more tests
you do, the more likely you're going to pick things up. But yeah, unfortunately, with the MIS-C,
as this boy out here, a lot of times we don't even catch that acute infection in kids.
They start getting sick and we realize it's MIS-C because we pick up the antibody tests.
One more from Ellen. I have a friend in Paris just short of 65 years old had COVID last March.
March 3 this year was diagnosed again this time with the UK variant. On March 21,
three weeks after diagnosis, our TPCR symptomatic still. Her antibodies were tested
were almost non-existent. She'll be getting the vaccine shortly, AstraZeneca, and I advised her to
have them tested again three weeks after the second dose. If she still has few or no antibodies,
would she be a good candidate for monoclonal antibodies? She's concerned long-term that
without antibodies, she will be liable to reinfection forever. Should she get trusted for T cells,
although from what I understand from SET-T, they will not protect her from infection.
Actually, they're very sophisticated. Those are interesting ideas. We have the idea that
the antibodies prevent you from getting infected, that the T cell is very quickly clear. I think
the kinetics, people may not know the kinetics. I was joking about those people. They know how
long a red cell lasts, but they don't know how long a T cell lasts. They don't know how long
it takes for the T cell response to fire up. The T cell response we know from the T to text
studies from the adaptive group, about day three to four, you have T cells ramping up. So, they ramp
up pretty quickly. We don't know how much the protection from the vaccines come from T cells,
or how much comes from antibodies. But going forward, I would envision there being certain
individuals, particularly we talked about the person on a bad effect, where maybe they're going
to have an issue with their immune response, particularly a person who's maybe on rituxan,
a therapy that interferes with B cells. In addition to vaccination, maybe these people
are going to get a monoclonal cocktail or a beer GSK variant, non-shifting targeting monoclonal
once a year. So, yeah, I don't think we know yet, but I think these are excellent questions
that are being looked at. And some people, if the prevalence stays as high as it is,
may still need something beyond just the vaccination. The hope is that we get so many people vaccinated
that a chance of exposure becomes minimal. But that will take, as was mentioned,
not only getting all the adults vaccinated, not only getting the adolescents vaccinated,
but getting the kids vaccinated as well. That's COVID-19 clinical update number 56 with Dr. Daniel
Griffin. Thank you, Daniel. Thank you so much. And everyone, be safe. We still have a rough
April ahead of us here. And I know Easter, this is going to drop on Saturday, right before Easter.
Be safe. Keep those group sizes down.
