This week in virology, the podcast about viruses, the kind that make you sick.
From Microbe TV, this is Twiv. This week in virology, episode 741 recorded on April 8th, 2021.
I'm Vincent Rackeniello, and you're listening to the podcast all about viruses. Joining me today
from New York, Daniel Griffin. Hello, everyone. That's right, Daniel. This is update number 57,
and how are things going this week? They are a little bit better, but what
Twiver are you at? What Twiver are we up to Vincent to say there? 741.
741, okay. I'm looking for the 747, like, because that's the big one with the upper deck.
Then after that, there's a 777, right? And then the 787. We'll go through all those. Don't worry.
All right, let me start with my quotation, and then I will give the update on where we are.
So this is be kind for everyone you meet is fighting a hard battle.
And this is actually from Philo of Alexandria, 20 BCE to 20 CE. So this goes back away, but I
think maybe we need to remember. We've come out of this pandemic, and a lot of ways worse,
a lot of ways divided, hostile. Sometimes I feel like I'm in a Monty Python movie,
and someone sees their neighbors, they run away because this actually developed what I'm going to
point. The fear of normal, phone know. A lot of us are pretty traumatized from this last year,
so I deal if we can all start working together. We are on the same side relative to the virus.
So my three quotations, as always, never miss an opportunity to vaccinate, never miss an
opportunity to test, and never waste a vaccine dose. Let's get those vaccines into arms. The
fridges and freezers do not need the vaccines people do. Where are we right now? What's sort of
the update? Worldwide, I don't often mention this, but worldwide, let's look, where are we
looking? The world picture worldwide, the case numbers and deaths are rising. With over a half
a million new cases per day, it's probably more, but that's what we're hearing, over 10,000 deaths
per day, again, probably higher. This is certainly not over. What about here in the US? I like to
think that the experience in Israel is encouraging. They're ahead of us. The experience in the UK
is encouraging. They're also ahead of us. The US, hopefully we're going to be next in line,
sort of a beacon of what happens with vaccinations, but we are still on this plateau here in the US.
Thanks, mainly to a few states. I call you out. Everyone in Michigan, Florida, New York, New Jersey,
and Pennsylvania, we're still seeing lots of cases, high positivity rates at these places.
Now, Georgia, oddly enough, is not reporting a lot of cases. They're not in the top 10s
in terms of cases, but they are in the top three in terms of daily deaths. I say that a little
tongue in cheek, but there certainly are some issues with not doing enough tests around the
country, particularly in certain places. You can't hide the deaths. I guess you probably could,
as we learned, but when you see those deaths, it really suggests that we're not capturing all
those cases. I did want to point out, isn't the CDC in Georgia? It means you'd be doing a better
job of testing, tracking, and everything else. Across the US, we have less testing, but we still
have the same number of new cases each day. I'm not sure that this is as low a plateau as people
might think. The same number of people are in the hospital across the board, certainly here in
New York since February. There are fewer deaths per day. It's odd that we're celebrating that we're
under 1,000, that we're still seeing 600, 800, 800 a day. That's pretty high plateau.
Things that have changed is the age of the patients in the hospital, and the age of those testing
positive on average is decreased. That's something that's being reported. That's certainly something
we're seeing in our, we still do a tremendous amount of testing here in the tri-state area
at pro health and opt-in tri-state. That's my update, but now let's get into children and COVID.
This is always a hot topic. We've covered that full in-person learning can be done
safely. Now, we have guidance from the CDC, but I'm getting lots of questions about how do we
actually guarantee that this is done safely and not just done? This is interesting.
So I'm going to throw in, and this is sort of thrown out of phase order, but it's in the children
topic. We got some updates about the multi-system inflammatory syndrome during the COVID-19 pandemic
in children. So what I like to point out is that children certainly are at low, lower risk than
adults, but they are not at no risk. So let's put some context here. So in JAMA pediatrics,
the article trends in geographic and temporal distribution of US children with multi-system
inflammatory syndrome during the COVID-19 pandemic was published. This was a cross-sectional study
of 1,733 patients with multi-system inflammatory syndrome in children. So the miss C.
And the analysis included patients with illness onset from March 2020 to January 2021 that
met the miss C case definition. Patients with Miss C predominately presented with
gastrointestinal symptoms, such as abdominal pain, vomiting and diarrhea, as well as skin rash
and conjunctival hyperremia. So that's a redness to the eyes, to the whites of the eyes.
Most patients developed hypotension or shock with about 60% overall being admitted to the
intensive care unit. And I think I've mentioned that this went from early on being less to 50%
to later on at being 80, 90%. So sort of evolving numbers. Myocarditis, so inflammation of the heart
muscle, cardiac dysfunction, and coronary artery dilation. So these are the blood vessels that
wrap around the heart actually dilating. That was reported in about a third of patients.
Now, most miss C illness are believed to result from asymptomatic or mild COVID-19.
I think sort of want to reinforce that asymptomatic or mild COVID-19 upfront.
With hyper inflammation coinciding with peak antibody production, several weeks after that
initial SARS-CoV-2 infections. So patients with Miss C were reported to have significantly
higher titers of the SARS-CoV-2 receptor binding domain IgG-80 bodies compared with
other patients hospitalized with COVID-19. So just sort of an update. This is out there.
We're getting more information on it. But let's talk a little bit about the school opening plans.
I was getting a lot of texts and messages about one of the local school districts that is
planning an opening. And they started laying out their guidelines, they're going to separate
the desk by three feet. The children are going to be wearing masks at all times.
They're actually going to have these plexiglass dividers. So I'm hearing all this, this sounds
encouraging, upgrading of the ventilation system. But then I had a very interesting quarantine
outline. And what they were saying was that, okay, we're putting all these things in place.
But if a child tests positive, anyone within three feet of them, so the desks within three
of them, they will all be quarantined. And since this school is one where the children go to
different classrooms, that one sort of index positive case will then affect, I guess you could do the
math on this, right? Like three in front, three behind and one on each side. So eight kids from
each class will be quarantined for the required quarantine period. And some of the questions the
parents were asking, well, if it's safe to be within three feet with all this mitigation,
then why are these kids going into quarantine? If our kids are going to actually have exposures
in school, you know, and it's sort of a back and forth. And I think that one of the things that
may be missing here for a lot of the schools is they're being asked to open, but they don't
necessarily have the professional guidance to help them put the whole plan together.
I think this has come up many times. If you do not have an exposure, you do not need to quarantine.
And if you're setting up a school plan that's going to actually provide exposure opportunities
for the children, that's not a great school opening plan. So, you know, reach out. If you
don't have the expertise, if you don't know how to do this, a lot of people don't have expertise.
I mean, a superintendent, a principal, a teacher, I don't want to be the one, you know, teaching your
high schoolers or your middle schoolers. You probably don't want to be the one coming up with
school reopening plans during a pandemic without some communication. So I throw that out there. I
do think that we can open schools safely, but you have to have the understanding and the science
to do this. And this ties directly into transmission. And today we're going to talk a lot about
transmission. So much about COVID-19 has been controversial and either content and even
contentious. So remember my quotation? We're all in this together. The virus is the enemy,
not your neighbor. And I guess I shouldn't be surprised. I still remember it was during my
graduate training when, you know, it almost came to fisticuffs. You know, I was having a dispute with
with another one of the graduate students about whether or not NF Kappa B activation was essential
for TH 17 differentiation. Really? Really? That was enough to get like an overheated argument?
Here, we're actually talking about something that affects people's lives. And, you know,
this is a scientific question. And I think we need to be level headed when we discuss
what do we know about this so that we can make appropriate decisions to protect everyone.
I mean, I think one of the issues, I will say, the issue of transmission was complicated by
terms of art. There are certain words that we use in science. There's certain words that we use
even slightly differently in the clinical arena, terms of art, such as airborne. And there are
common usage of these terms by the general public. So a lot of times we would ask that question,
you know, is this airborne? I remember a wonderful article. It may not be airborne,
but it's borne by the air, right? I mean, so there was a lot of confusion, like what is happening
here? So in the open forum, infectious disease journal, the article SARS-CoV-2 infection among
healthcare workers, despite the use of surgical masks and physical distancing, the role of airborne
transmission was published by a group out of Israel. So this was a case study where the authors
described a single source outbreak of COVID-19 from an asymptomatic patient to nine healthcare
workers and room contacts in a general pediatric ward, despite meeting the current guidelines for
PPE and the wearing of surgical masks. Now, due to confirmation bias, I actually worry about this
article. I think it's going to be embraced by sort of both sides of this controversy right back
to sides again. So I'm going to take a moment here and we're going to have to learn to be a
little painful, but we're going to do a little vocabulary here. But I think this is critical.
This is important. This is how we keep ourselves safe. And I think understanding these terms are
important. So the first term, respiratory droplets. These are small drops or portions of liquid
that are in the five to 10 micron range. These are expelled when a person coughs, sneezes,
sigs, or as we now know, I think is more generally appreciated, talking as well. People always
think about this. Well, you're not coughing, you're not sneezing. If you're not sick, how are you
spreading this? Just talking is creating these droplets. That's why a person can be pre-symptomatic
and still create them. You do not need to be coughing, sneezing. Droplet nuclei or aerosols,
right? Now, we're talking about a term of art. These are small drops that are less than five
microns. And due to their small size, they can actually remain airborne for extended periods of
time and transmit over significant distances. Then we have follomites and these are contaminated
surfaces. So what about airborne transmission? Now, the CDC points out that this is a specialized
use word in medicine and public health and is used to describe infections capable of being
transmitted through exposure to infections, pathogen containing small droplets, and particles
suspended in the air over long distances that persist in the air for long times.
And where are we with all this? I just showed you an article, oh my gosh, with an instance of
airborne transmission, despite masks. So as per the CDC, the principal mode by which people are
infected with SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, is through exposure to respiratory
droplets carrying infectious virus. They do go on to say airborne transmission of SARS-CoV-2
can occur under special circumstances. And those with a special circumstances that we
describe. So what are those special circumstances? Enclosed spaces, right? We keep harping on
indoor versus outdoor. Enclosed spaces within which an infectious person either exposed
susceptible people at the same time or to which susceptible people were exposed shortly after
the infectious person had left that space. So that indoor poor air circulation, prolonged exposure
to respiratory particles. Remember, this is a continuum. There's no plexiglass sort of shield
at this distinction between the different micron sizes. So shouting, singing, exercising,
you're actually going to increase the concentration of suspended respiratory droplets in the airspace.
So prolonged exposure. And then inadequate ventilation, which all this is all tied together,
or poor handling. So you're allowing a buildup of suspended small respiratory droplets and
particles. So that's your suburban home without good air exchanges. So I think that we can very
clearly at this point say that the CDC, the WHO, and the science supports that the principal mode
here is respiratory droplets. Airborne transmission is rare, but can happen in
circumstances. And fomites contact. I think the current CDC estimate is that maybe one in every
10,000 infection was due to surfaces. So just rethink all that bleach and chlorox and everything
else. So on April, on April 5th, so Monday, April 5th, the CDC published an updated science brief
addressing fomite transmission. And this was titled SARS-CoV-2 and surface fomite transmission
for indoor community environments. And I'm sorry to the makers of bleach, but this goes along the
lines of what we've been discussing. But instead of focusing on the distinction in respiratory
droplets and aerosols, it focuses on getting COVID-19. So getting that virus and developing
COVID-19 from surfaces and the summary statement, the principal mode by which people are infected
with SARS-CoV-2 is through exposure to respiratory droplets. It is possible for people to be infected
through contact with contaminated surfaces or objects, fomites, but the risk is generally
considered to be low. So this doesn't mean we're walking around with unclean hands. I still want
people to wash their hands. But I think there has been a lot of resources put into hygiene theater.
And they actually conclude in the statement that in most situations, cleaning surfaces using soap
or detergent and not requiring this disinfection is enough to reduce the risk testing. The journal
of clinical microbiology published a nice meta analysis performance of saliva, oral pharyngeal
swabs and nasal swabs for SARS-CoV-2, molecular detection, a systematic review and meta analysis.
Now, for starters, what is a meta analysis? So in the edited words of Mark Chris Lap,
Perciflagger's infectious disease, Puskass Fade, this is when you pile a whole bunch of studies
on top of each other and they suddenly turn into gold. I think Mark will be turning over in his
grave even though he's still alive. It just has decided to stop Puskassing. So he's only died in a
certain way. But this was really a high-level summary where they looked through. They found
1,253 unique citations. They then drilled down to identify 25 saliva studies, 11 nasal swabs,
6 oral pharyngeal and 4 oral pharyngeal nasal swab studies. So from all the different
sources, what they were using is nasal pharyngeal swabs of the gold standard and saying if we do
other methods, how much of the time are we able to pick that up? And so they basically came down with
the nasal swabs. We're picking up about 82%. The oral pharyngeal, we're picking up about 84%
and the saliva, we're picking up about 88% of those that were picked up with the nasal pharyngeal
swabs. They also reported a few things that I found interesting. They reported finding several
studies that the unsupervised, self-collected nasal swab specimens had higher percent positives
compared to those collected by healthcare workers. So I was trying to analyze this. Is this that
healthcare workers are too gentle? Is it that when no one's watching, people are willing to get a
much better, deeper sample. So you turn away and tell them to go at it. I also thought it was
interesting. A lot of times we have people hold a mask and they cough and they try to get up this
deep throat saliva and we tell them you can't eat, you can't drink, you can't brush your teeth.
That really didn't seem to do much in terms of sensitivity. So maybe it's a little nicer. People
can show up for their testing with brushed teeth and having some adequate hydration. There were a
number of limitations though I thought in this study. And my big one, and I think all the listeners
will guess at it, was where are the CT values? And I think we've learned over the last year that
nasal pharyngeal swabs are very sensitive, but sometimes maybe are they too sensitive to answer
certain questions. So if saliva, for instance, is missing these low-level RNA PCR positives,
weeks after the acute infection, do we really care? Is that really a limitation? Is this really
relevant if we're testing to avoid transmissions such as might be done for certain sporting programs
or now we know New York working with Mount Sinai is going to develop this large-scale saliva
testing availability for opening large venue events. If those people have a few thousand
bits of RNA, am I concerned as someone going into a venue, particularly as a vaccinated person
going into a venue, versus someone who has a high positivity, such a large amount of RNA that's
being picked up by antigen tests and all these others? So I think we have a lot of good testing
options and we just need to ask what question are we answering or asking when we do these tests?
Active vaccination. There does seem to be some growing evidence that there may be an actual
connection between the blood clotting and the platelet disorder and the AstraZeneca vaccine.
I used a lot of qualifications in there. It still appears that the incidence of this clotting and
platelet complication is rare and the risk of a COVID complication in most cases is significantly
higher if you remain unvaccinated. But this is evolving. The Medicines Health Care Products
Regulatory Agency, that's the MHRA, they regulate medicines, medicinal devices, blood components for
transfusion in the UK. They recorded 30 cases in 18 million vaccinated individuals. So we're
looking at a complication rate of one in 600,000, but there have been seven deaths. There may be
an issue with the age skewing. This may be something that is clustered more in younger individuals.
And so we're actually certainly seeing some changes where there's a preferential use of this
vaccine in older individuals and a preferential use of other vaccines in younger individuals.
So this is an evolving story. And as we learn more, we're going to have to decide what to do
here with this information. Just an update on the Pfizer EUA expansion, right? Let's get vaccines
to younger individuals or the option to have vaccines in younger 12, 13, 14, 15. And as far as
timing, right? We heard about the data. There is a required 15-day notice of intent to submit
before the FDA performs their review. So Paul Offit, who's a member of the Vaccines and Related
Biological Products Advisory Committee, just was saying the other day that so far that notice has
not been given. So, you know, whether it's later this month, I think it's going to be May at the
earliest that we see a potential e-way expansion down to our kids, 12, 13, 14, and 15. Passive
vaccination, right? The monoclonals. This seems to be going much better as far as getting these
off the shelves and to the patients. I think seeing the phase three data, all the help that
we've gotten from a lot of individuals to get the word out has helped. I have to say, on our last
tri-state urgent care call, this week the comment was that our whole book and infusion center was
basically getting fully booked. And we're all questions about how much capacity did we have
for our in-home infusion program. So people are really getting out and they're getting these
treatments. And I have to say this is tremendous. When we see these individuals' experience we have
is they get the infusion. And 36 hours later, they're really reporting sort of that Superman
feeling. I actually spent some time recently over at one of the Catholic hospitals in our area,
St. Francis Hospital, speaking with Stefan Moldauer, he's the head of the ER there,
just making sure we have everything firing as smoothly as we can on all cylinders.
Now, if I got that expression, correct. But right, we have the ability with monoclonals
to either go to outpatient infusion centers, to go to certain ERs, to go to certain infusion tents
that are set up outside of ERs, and to get even in-home infusions. And this seems to all be going
very smoothly with getting people access to the monoclonal cocktails. Some exciting developments
before we move forward. Right now, as mentioned, that's great and all, but this is putting an IV in.
It's a, well, 21 minutes we're allowed to, but a lot of centers are spending a full hour of the
infusion, plus a post-infusion observation time. V-R-G-S-K, which is trying to get their product
EUA, is also looking at expanding into an IM, an intra-muscular preparation. So right now,
they have Comet Peak, which is an ongoing phase two trial. And they're really looking at safety,
viral kinetics, pharmacodynamics, doing this as an IM, but they're about to fire up Comet tail.
And this will be a phase three trial, which is going to be starting in the next month or so,
and will be administering these IM products to high-risk adults, showing hopefully the same benefit
for reducing hospitalizations and deaths. But you can imagine the improved access. You getting
something like an EpiPen, where it can be just delivered from your local pharmacy, or maybe it's
what's brought in by an infusion team, or a home care team, and boom, just right into the muscle.
We'll talk about whether or not you need to withdraw that plunger when you do that,
and then going ahead with the treatment. Incubation, post-exposure period. Remember,
tests do not predict the future. I was on a call last night with a cab. And yeah, you got to keep
saying that. I use the pregnancy test analogy. Once someone is exposed, there's a period of time
when they can go on to become positive. If someone gets exposed, they immediately test,
it's probably going to be negative. But that does not mean that they will not go on and become
positive in the next two to 14 days. Once they get into that period of detectable viral replication,
remember our passive monoclonals, our passive vaccination. So time for monoclonals and monitoring,
no steroids, no antibiotics in that first week. If you do get into that early inflammatory phase,
second week, if the oxygen saturation is drop below 94, then you think of steroids, oxygen,
anticoagulation, perhaps from decivir. Most of these folks are not coming in with infections.
That is a later stage issue. And we got a lot of information. I'm going to say close on this,
but this is actually a big chunk. We're going to talk what we've learned about
about tail phase and long COVID. So in the BMJ, we saw the article post COVID syndrome in individuals
admitted to hospital with COVID-19 retrospective cohort study. So in this observational retrospective
matched cohort study, they reported on the outcomes with a mean of 140 days for 47,780
individuals that had been admitted to the NHS hospitals in England for COVID-19 and had been
discharged alive, right? So these are the individuals that got almost 50,000 that got COVID were in
the hospital. Nearly one third were readmitted and more than 10% died during this follow-up.
Those with COVID-19 were diagnosed with major adverse cardiovascular events,
liver disease, kidney disease, diabetes, after discharge, what were the rates?
Respectively, 3, 2.8, 1.9, and 1.5 times more. So major cardiovascular, three times more likely,
liver disease, almost three times more likely, kidney disease, twice as likely,
diabetes 1.5 times more frequently than in the matched control group. This is a bit of an issue,
right? I'm looking forward to more data on this, but we also had another study, and I think this
is getting a lot of attention. And this was in the Lancet Psychiatry Journal, and this paper,
6-month neurological and psychiatric outcomes in 236,379 survivors of COVID-19, a retrospective
cohort study using electronic health records. So this is really robust data, right? You know,
almost a quarter million survivors. So this was a retrospective cohort study and a time to event
analysis, and they were using data obtained from the tri-NEXS electronic health records. So
over 81 million patients in this database, and I should say this database exists, right? I think
we were painfully hearing of some early databases that were figments, but the primary cohort
comprised 236,379 patients who had a COVID-19 diagnosis, and they had one matched control cohort,
including patients diagnosed with influenza, other matched cohorts who could have patients
diagnosed with other respiratory tract infections during the same period. And they reported that
the estimated incidence of a neurological or psychiatric diagnosis in the following six months
was 33.6%. So a third of these survivors of COVID-19 hospitalization. If you were admitted to an ICU,
the estimated incidence was almost 50%, it was 46.4. So this is huge. And now what were these
neurological diagnoses? Intracranial hemorrhage, ischemic stroke, Parkinson's disease,
Guillain-Barre, nerve, nerve root, plexus disorders, myel, neural junction, and muscle disease,
encephalitis, dementia, psychosis, mood and anxiety disorders, substance use disorders,
and a lot of insomnia. Now I have to say this report is consistent with the work of some
of my colleagues at UHG. I think they're a little frustrated because their study is still winding
its way through peer review. But I had the opportunity earlier this week, the pleasure I should say
of speaking with our pro-health neurology group. I always like to get this is what we see in the
literature, this is what the studies are showing, what are we seeing in our clinical practice.
And so several of the neurologists were describing the challenges that we're seeing here in the
tri-state area. Presentations consisted with small fiber neuropathies with burning sensations,
and a lot of issues with either new onset headaches or an escalation of headaches from
intermittent to chronic. So unfortunately a growing number of individuals who maybe had
an intermittent vascular or migraine disorder, and now they're in constant pain, really challenging
to treat these individuals. I think this will get a lot of attention because it's quite upsetting,
I think, to not have your mind working, to be in constant pain, to be suffering.
I think that's enough bad news, right? It's enough bad news. I'll throw a little bit of good news in
here, and I think this is some perspective on the good news as well. We've heard a little bit,
and I've shared a little bit about the potential benefit of vaccination on long COVID. And I've
been seeing that. A lot of us who take care of a large cohort of patients who are never sick
enough to get in the hospital, but continue to suffer with the brain fog, the fatigue,
all these other disorders. We are seeing a large chunk of them report feeling better with vaccination.
But I reached out to Lawrence Schulman. He's one of our pulmonologists, and talking to him about
what about people that were sick enough? Now they have pulmonary scarring. Now they have things
that I just wouldn't really think a vaccination would reverse. In those individuals, a lot of our
long-term care COVID or post-COVID recovery centers, where they're dealing people who had
cardiac insults and pulmonary issues, a lot of this, I have to say, unfortunately, there
was a subset of patients where this is not reversible by vaccination. So still encouraging all these
individuals to get vaccinated, but it does sort of temper that optimism. There does appear to be
certain patient populations that are more likely to benefit from vaccinations, but there are certain
other individuals where a lot of the damage is done, the scarring is there. So I will close by saying,
thanks again for all the support we've had. This will be our final month, right? April, we are
supporting the American Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, and part of that support
will be providing scholarships for early career women investigators from low-income parts of the
world. So we're excited to do that. We're excited to allow them to attend the fall meeting,
and then hopefully really give them a boost and do something about
so many of the inequities that currently exist. All right, time for a few emails for
Daniel. You can send yours to Daniel at microbe.tv. The first is from Alida in Canada, who's a nurse
and is curious about you're saying it is a must to aspirate before injecting an IM.
In Canada, we have not done this for more than 20 years. I started nursing in 2000,
and I've never aspirated. I've given thousands of vaccines and injections. CDC does not recommend
aspiration, just my thoughts. No, they're more than just your thoughts. You're right.
So what is this issue of aspiration pulling back the plunger while doing an IM injection?
Hopefully I didn't say it's a must. Hopefully I said this is fairly standard,
still common. Should it be? So what does the CDC say? What does the WHO say? What is the science?
What is actually recommended and actually is not pulling back perhaps best practice?
Let's go through this. Thank you for asking this question. As per the CDC, aspiration before
injection of vaccines or toxoids, pulling back on the syringe plunger after needle insertion,
but before injection is not necessary because no large blood vessels are present at the
recommended injection sites. Any process that includes aspiration may be more painful for
infants. Actually, I think you're timing on when you graduate is appropriate. They reference
the study back in the 90s, and the WHO does not recommend the plunger pull. So what does the
science say? I have to say, based on what we know, the need for aspiration prior to administering an
injection is dependent on certain factors. As a general rule, I'm going to say the science does
not support that you need to pull back on the plunger. And there's ample evidence suggesting
that. But what are the couple little caveats, right? It still is fairly standard. A lot of people do
this. Is there harm? Well, as mentioned in the pediatric population, the original teaching was
you held negative pressure for five seconds to make sure no blood would come up. That actually
creates pain. That is painful. It is delaying. Some of us that I think this is interesting.
What about epinephrine? You say, like, Oh, this is epinephrine. If I got that into a blood vessel,
my gosh, that that could be quite different than an I am injection of epinephrine.
Now let's all think about those epipeds, right? Those epipeds you basically put against your lateral
thigh, you push a button and boom, out comes the needle and out comes the medicine. Things are a
little different now, I have to say. I have seen people put injections in the deltoid bursa.
I have seen people completely miss the muscle and put it in the fat. Probably the pulling back
on the plunger is probably a small issue. What are the big issues getting that needle into the
muscle using a one inch needle? So you actually get through whatever subcutaneous tissue and into
it. If you're going to do IV, you definitely, well, I'm going to use the word, definitely.
You do want to make sure you're in the vessel because a lot of our medicines, if they're
infiltrating, can actually be caustic and cost tissue damage. But yeah, if you're going to put
it into a muscle and you know what you're doing and you're actually in the muscle,
do you really need to pull back? No. Is it better not to pull back? Yeah, probably actually,
I think best practice would be no. If you're going to give the shots in the deltoid,
put it in the deltoid, not in the bursa, not in the chubby part of the arm.
If you're thinking about doing a buttock shot, actually consider moving that to lateral thigh.
Well, you actually got a lot of emails about that and they were divided between,
we don't do it and we do it. It was very interesting. So it's one of those situations.
Well, let's come up, I think, Vincent, because the whole AstraZeneca issue.
And one of the theories they have there is that maybe, you know, younger people better,
you know, vascularized muscle. Maybe there are large enough vessels that you're getting it in
there. It's good to have the science and the current recommendations. We did so far this week,
213 vaccinations in my office. We're doing another 100 tomorrow afternoon into the evening.
Have I been pulled back on that plunger every time? No. Have I pulled back ever? No. So I'll
fast up. Okay. Deepa writes, I have been advised by my most excellent rheumatologist to skip two
doses of methotrexate after taking any vaccine, including the one for SARS-CoV-2 based on the
attached publication. This is the first study I'm aware of that carefully evaluated the immune
response to flu vaccine in RA patients. They randomized to two cohorts, one that skipped
two doses of methotrexate, one that did not. There is quite a remarkable and significant
difference in the antibody response elicited in favor of skipping methotrexate.
Key finding, methotrexate discontinuation for two weeks after vaccination significantly
increases immunogenicity of a seasonal influenza vaccine in patients with rheumatoid arthritis,
who had been on a stable dose of methotrexate without significantly altering,
increasing risk of disease activity. I hope this is helpful to you,
your patients and listeners of the podcast. Not many people are aware of this study.
We need more studies like this. No, this is great. So thank you. Actually,
Deepa, we do need more studies like this. And there's no reason that we can't be getting them,
right? We are currently vaccinating billions of people by the time we're done here.
And this is the time. And I know a lot of scientists have talked about, we need a rapid review,
rapid ability to fire up these studies. And if you think about it, right? These are studies
that are minimal harm. They're kind of observational studies. Rheumatologists, physicians who are
using these medications are trying to space these out. Some people sort of almost practice
preference might be only a week. Some people don't do this. Other people are getting this
two week. This is data. I think there would be very valuable in helping us just at immunizations
across the board, right? We do not only influenza vaccines, hopefully every year. But now we do
COVID vaccines. We have a lot of vaccines. So having really good science-based guidance here
would be tremendous. All right, one more from Mary Ann who writes, I got my first dose of Pfizer
March 23 at the time I signed up. Walgreens had a scheduled a second dose four weeks out.
And my next is scheduled 28 days. And she found out yesterday by the times that Walgreens had
taken upon themselves to schedule these second doses at their convenience, rather than at the
tested interval, which should be three weeks, 21 days. And Mary Ann goes on to expressing her
displeasure with Walgreens and wants to know any advice. Should I be looking at a booster
sooner than later? Should I ask my doctor for antibody testing? What can I do? I was looking
forward to getting out of my house again. Now I feel unsure. I figure I'll be wearing a mask
forever. Okay. So don't be so upset. Yeah, this was interesting, right? Walgreens decided that it
would be easier for them for their scheduling system to just do four weeks between shots and
just didn't care whether it was Pfizer or Baderda, which is interesting too, right? Because they're
shipping those second doses out and then they're sitting on a shelf somewhere for like an extra
week, right? Not in people's arms. And Walgreens was basically taken a task when this became public
and told that that that is not what we recommend. You need to be giving those second doses,
you know, 21 days or sort of four side, four days either side of those 21 days,
not waiting till 28 days, unless, you know, as we say, extraordinary circumstances.
So, you know, go ahead, get that second dose when you can get it. Do I think scientifically,
it makes a difference whether you're getting it at 21 days or 28, you know, in a lot of ways,
I compare Moderna and Pfizer to Coca-Cola in a CAD versus Coca-Cola in a bottle. You're getting
the same mRNA. The packaging is a little bit different. You know, the size is a little bit
different. But the outcome, it's going to quench your thirst. It's going to protect you from COVID
quite well. So yeah, don't feel like Walgreens creating this difficulty is going to mean that
you're going to be less protected at the end of the day. So Marianne says, thank you and the
whole Twif team for being a calm place to find accurate information. You guys get an A plus plus,
Walgreens gets an F minus. Okay. And on that note, that is COVID-19 clinical update number 57
with Dr. Daniel Griffin. Thank you, Daniel. All right. Thank you so much. And everyone, be safe.
