This week in virology, the podcast about viruses, the kind that make you sick.
From MicroTV, this is Twiv, this week in virology episode 744 recorded on April 15th, 2021.
I'm Vincent Rackeniello, and you're listening to the podcast All About Viruses.
Joining me today from New York, Daniel Griffin.
Hello, everyone.
This is clinical update number 58.
Things gotten better since last week, Daniel.
I'm not going to say that they have, and I will start off with the quotation that is in line with
that. When things are going well, something will go wrong. When things just can't get any worse,
they will. Anytime things appear to be going better, you have overlooked something.
And that is the immortal words of Richard Feynman.
Excellent. That's perfect for this week, isn't it?
Yes. Actually, I don't know if people have a chance to read, but he's written a few books.
One of them surely you must be joking is one of my favorites.
But, yes, this has been a very tough week.
Never miss an opportunity to vaccinate, never miss an opportunity to test, never waste a vaccine
dose. Let me start off with my update. We've got a lot of stuff that happened this last week,
so we have a lot to cover. But this week there was some attention given to
lost on the front line, which has been a 12-month investigation by the Guardian,
Cage, and to track healthcare worker deaths during the pandemic.
And I found that reading the article, this was titled, 12 months of trauma, more than 3,600
US health workers died in COVID's first year. It was a very emotional experience for me to read
this through. I focus on the science, what we can learn from this experience, what we have
learned about how to treat this horrible disease. But all the work we still need to
do, and I think to take stock of what we've really been through is upsetting.
As I ever count, thousands of health care workers that have died over the last year,
many of these are my colleagues, many of these individuals I've known,
trained with. There were some key findings that were here in this publication,
and just a few of them. One, more than half of those who died were younger than 60.
And I think that is something. The general population, the median age of people who died
from COVID is in the 70s. But in the healthcare worker population, it was younger. The other
nurses and support staff died in far higher numbers than physicians. So there's an equity
issue here, where the physicians were either better able to or better helped to keep themselves
safe. As I think a lot of people know, if they've ever been in the hospital,
ever interacted with healthcare, it's the nurses, it's the assistants, it's the age
who are really in their hands on. And one or the other, twice as many workers,
healthcare workers died in nursing homes as in the hospitals. And this is something
particularly sort of sensitive issue for me, because of all the controversies about the nursing
homes and the fact that a lot of those workers were, I have to say, blamed, you know, say,
oh, those hardworking healthcare workers brought it into the nursing homes. It's really tragic
just how many of my colleagues have died through the last year. The last week, I was
talking with one of my partners and Nuja Lee, who is now the associate chief of the Division
of Infectious Disease for Pro Health New York. Just about how fondly I remember all the support
and recognition we received from our communities during these difficult times, you know, the free
food, the evening vigils, the placards, some of those are still up. Just let everyone know,
this has really meant a tremendous amount. Things continue to be tough, but I have to say all the
support has really meant something. So thank you. In addition to all my colleagues that died
directly from COVID, I suspect many of our listeners are aware of how many. Well, more than one of
my colleagues, you know, you may even know sort of in local community circles here, just found this
whole tragedy be too much and actually took their own lives during these dark times. So,
you know, this continues to be a difficult time. We are on a plateau with far too many people
getting infected far too many people dying here in the US were on a plateau. But when we look
beyond our borders and we don't have to look very far, we can see those numbers. We're now seeing
counted over 5 million new cases a week. And the death toll just keeps climbing. So we are,
we are nowhere near mission accomplished here. All right. On that happy note, children and COVID
and masks, I'm going to throw in here. So perhaps I'll be remembered for a few things.
You know, after this settles down, you know, one of them trying to point out early on the tragedy
of long COVID and not to dismiss these individuals that this was real. But I think the other is for
repeatedly my attempts to point out that children, I believe are at lower risk, but they're not at
no risk. So there was a research letter that was published in JAMA characteristics and disease
severity of US children and adolescents diagnosed with COVID-19. Now, the authors here were affiliated
with the COVID-19 response team at the CDC, the Epidemic Intelligence Service Center for Surveillance,
Epidemiology and Laboratory Sciences, also at the CDC, and the Commissioned Core US Public Health
Service in Rockland, Maryland. And a couple of things that this article pointed out. One was that
more than 2 million pediatric COVID-19 cases were reported in the United States, you know, in 2020.
And they say, although approximately half of pediatric patients with COVID-19 experience mild
disease, some children require admission to intensive care units or require the use of invasive
mechanical ventilation. And what they did here is they conducted a cohort study to try to estimate
just an association between demographic clinical characteristics and severe COVID-19 among hospitalized
pediatric patients. So we just go through a little bit of what they present to us, but then I'm going
to give the caveats as well. So they they evaluated a cohort of 20,714 pediatric patients with COVID-19
pretty evenly split, about 52.9% were girls. The other half males, right? So we have sort of a split
here. They reported that of these individuals, 11.7% were hospitalized, and of those hospitalized,
about a third had severe COVID with management in the ICU. So a lot of caveats here. I think that we
can say a couple things from the study one, and this seems consistent with the experience shared
among my pediatric colleagues, is that if a person under the age of 18 ends up in the hospital,
as we saw this cohort, a quarter to a third of them will be taken care of in the ICU.
One of the things the authors even said is it isn't even necessarily the same level of severity
we might see an adult that prompts that, but we sort of have a heightened level of concern for our
younger individuals. One of the things that is tough, I don't think we really have a good sense,
and I've touched this before, about how many kids with COVID actually go undiagnosed.
You know, we never find all the asymptomatic kids, and we certainly never find the untested
symptomatic kids. So I don't think we have a true denominator here. So the one thing I'm going to
say, and I like to be honest on this, when I see 11.7% of kids that get COVID end up in the hospital,
I don't think that really is consistent with our experience. I think 11.7% of this cohort
ended up in the hospital, that is true. But I'm not sure this is representative of the entire
pediatric cohort. I think if that was actually happening, our pediatric hospitals would not be
as quiet as they were during the pandemic to date. That may be different in different countries.
Some positive news on the vaccine front. Don't worry, I'll get to the negative.
Pfizer, BioNTech, did announce that they are requesting expansion of their E-way to include
individuals age 12, 13, 14, and 15. And I discussed a week ago when we recorded the last
wave that this was sort of impending. And once that was announced, the clock would start with a
minimum of 15 days from the announcement. So we're moving into that. So we're hoping that in
May, we're going to see Pfizer expanded down to age 12. Also, still in the children in COVID,
I've been getting a lot of communications about this. I think many people are comfortable with the
idea that schools can be safely open. But I'm getting a lot of questions about something I brought
up on the last 12. And this is this seeming disconnect between it's safe for the kids to sit
three feet apart with masks on. And at the same point, the CDC considering being within less than
six feet, so at three feet, regardless of masks being an exposure. So where are we with? What are
the updated as of March 21st, 2021 CDC public health guidance for community related exposure
definitions and guidance? So as per the CDC, individuals who have had close contact within six feet
for a total of 15 minutes or more exposed to, and I'm going to pause there for a second, right? So the
CDC is still using that 15 minutes. I know a lot of times you see the 10 minutes thrown out there,
but sort of scouring through the CDC website 15 minutes seems to be what the CDC is still
still putting out there exposed to to whom to a person with COVID-19 who either has symptoms
or in the period two days before symptom onset until they meet the criteria for discontinuing
isolation, right? So that is either 10 days or there's the test out ending isolation option.
Or the other is a person who has tested positive for COVID-19, but it has not had any symptoms. So
again, you can do the same thing. You're going to use that as your start date and the exposure is
anytime two days prior to that positive test or until they meet the criteria for ending the
isolation. So the two issues here, the first one I pointed out, 10 minutes versus 15 minutes,
the CDC is still using the 15 minutes. But then there was a note, there's a note sort of right
below this, and it says note this exposure, this is irrespective of whether the person with COVID-19
or the contact was wearing a mask or whether the contact was wearing respiratory, personal,
protective equipment, PPA. So wait, do masks work? We were just told, right, that three feet of
distance with everyone wearing masks in schools is minimal risk. So here comes down to the issue
is should the CDC update guidance for what is considered a school exposure and what ends up
triggering quarantine? I will stay one of the schools in our area, not right here in Port
Washington, one of our local schools has been in contact with the local community of health,
local department of health, and they've actually sort of updated their local guidance and said,
no, if we're going to allow these schools to open under these circumstances, if everyone's wearing
masks, three feet apart with enforced mask wearing, if that's really being held to, we're not considered
that, can you consider that a trigger for quarantine? So I think this is an important issue.
If being three feet apart, less than six feet wearing mask indoors at a school should count
as an exposure, this is actually an interesting issue because for health care workers, we actually
have slightly different rules, right? For health care workers, there's the idea that we know how
to properly wear masks, and there is some concern that at least per the CDC up till now,
that people don't really either know how to wear masks properly, or the masks that they are wearing
are not proper masks. So I understand the concern, right? The people don't wear their masks properly,
the masks are a different quality, but I do want to point out, Dr. Fauci, we all see him on TV,
we see our president, they're not wearing medical masks, they're wearing cloth masks. So I think
it's critical for messaging that we get on the same page with regard to our masks effective or not,
but maybe we haven't been doing enough education about how to wear those masks properly. So I'm
actually going to take a moment here, this will be my public service announcement on how do you wear
your mask properly? And I'm basically going to be sharing helpful CDC advice on how to improve
how your mask protects you and others. So I'm going to hit eight points here. So one,
make sure your mask fits snugly across your face. You should be breathing through your mask and not
around it, and please cover your nose. In my mind, if your nose is sticking out, you are not actually
wearing a mask. And I have a couple, you know, for those people watching, I have a couple masks
here to demonstrate. So I'm going to demonstrate that now. If you're listening, I'll describe it
for you. I'm going to put a mask on that will fit snugly against my face.
And I think people who are watching can see this is actually, I want to thank one of our listeners
who I believe this is handmade in Thailand. It's not important that your mask is completely symmetrical,
right? It's just important, right? I always get in trouble with that, trying to get my mask
symmetrical. But it has to fit. You want to use a nose piece if you can. So that's number number
three. So choose a mask with layers. I'm going to take this off now. You don't want to have just
one thin piece of fabric. You want to have layers. Also, some of these will actually have the ability
to put a filter in there. Three, choose a mask with a nose wire to improve the fit and bend that
wire over your nose to fit close to your face. Four, check your mask to make sure you feel warm
air coming through the mask, not out the sides, the top or the bottom. Five, if you have facial
hair, we're not sure how effective masks are. So trim that beard if you can. Consider double
masking. Consider shaving. Six, do not pull your mask down or out of the way to speak. And I want
to use this as an example. Again, you'll see, I saw this and I see this all the time. People put
their mask on and then they want to speak. So they either pull it away from their mouth or they pull
it down to speak. I think while we may have witnessed one of our elected officials, he needed to cough
or sneeze. He pulled off his mask, coughed into his hands, sneezed into his hands. I'm not sure
where he wiped them. But you do not take the mask off to cough or sneeze or talk. You want to have
it on specifically at those times. Also, don't take it off to yell at the athletes. That's another
one I see. Also, teachers, you did not take it off to have your students better understand what
you have to tell them. Seven, do not wear masks with one way valves. They only protect you and
not others. You are sending a very negative message. Eight, do wash your hands immediately
after removing a mask. Remember, this is supposed to protect you. So if it's actually protected you,
it is now potentially dirty. So take it off by the loops and then try to avoid contaminating
your hands. We also have some do knots from the CDC. Do not wear two disposable masks at the same
time. So if you're wearing those, those below mask, which are that charged fiber, these have been
studied one mask at a time not two. And this also applies to the issue of K and 95 or N 95s.
We are currently recommending not to cover those with a surgical mask. I have to say for my medical
colleagues, we got quite used to the fact that we were using surgical masks to protect and preserve
our N 95. So I know some of my colleagues still feel a little bit odd about that. So all right,
the pre exposure period. On April 13, we saw the article, physical inactivity is associated with
a higher risk for severe COVID-19 outcomes, a study in 48,440 adult patients. And this was
published in the British Journal of Sports Medicine. This might be a surprise that exercising might
have some health benefits. But I'm going to go out on a limb here. And what did these individuals
find? They found for those individuals who were consistently inactive, that they had a greater
risk of hospitalization. So these are individuals diagnosed with COVID-19 who were consistently
inactive. Their odds ratio of hospitalization was 2.26. Their admission to the ICU was 1.73
increased odds ratio. And their chance of death was 2.49. So almost twice as likely to die,
if they were diagnosed with COVID-19 ended up in the hospital. So basically, people who are
consistently inactive have a higher risk, at least per this study. So out on a limb, perhaps people
should exercise one more reason. Now we need a randomized control trial where half the people
exercise and the other half serves as the control to really determining if exercise is a good thing.
But I'm a little worried if we do this as a blind study, are people going to end up hurting
themselves? So somehow we have to have people exercising, not exercising, not aware of which
group they're in, and not wearing blindfolds. Testing. I think we're seeing an interesting
pattern here in our primary care and urgent cares where people are post vaccination. And they have
what seems like mild symptoms after a good COVID exposure, but yet there are antigen test
negative. So we may be seeing some of that sort of, you know, effective the vaccine
sort of below the radar of even getting positive testing. So when we have more information, I'll
make sure I share that. Active vaccination. Everyone's probably waiting for this.
I expect all our listeners are familiar with the J&J vaccine pause here in the US. And let me
just give everyone an update. I had the opportunity to be on the call today, where we got to run down
on what we know to date. So this is, this is, you know, hot off the press. So there were six
reports to the vaccine adverse event reporting system between March 19th and April 12th of women
between the ages of 18 and 48, having a rare clotting complication. So these individuals had
cavernous sinus thrombosis. This is a clotting of the vein complex inside your brain sort of,
you know, think about a few inches behind your eyeballs there. And they had platelet counts
less than 150,000 per millimeter acute. I do want to point out by comparison, we have seen
zero reports of this cavernous sinus thrombosis with rhombocytopenia in the 182 million doses
of mRNA vaccines given in the United States. So I know there's a little bit of, oh, this is just
something. But no, this looks like it is not a problem with the mRNA vaccine. So I want to make
that really clear on set. For these individuals, it was six to 13 days after vaccination. So this
sort of follows the timing. That's when we start to see the IgG or the immunoglobulin start to come
up, not necessarily just IgG. They were all Caucasian females, three out of the sixth were
three out of the six were obese. So half were obese, half were not. There were no known
coagulation disorders in this group of six women. Initially, headache was reported in five of the
six. The last person did not have a headache initially, but a headache soon developed. Their
initial presentation was backpaid. Now, half of the patients had clotting in other areas. So
lower extremities, the portal vein, pulmonary artery. And they were able to, and this is going
to be relevant as we go forward, they're able to test for something in anybody against platelet
factor four. And of the five that they were able to test, all of these antibody tests were positive.
One individual died. Two of them recovered and were discharged from the hospital. At the time of
the report that I got today, half of them were still in the hospital. A couple of conclusions,
the rate of this CVST does appear to be higher than would be expected for this observation period,
and in this particular demographic. I will also point out that in the phase three trial,
there was a 25 year old man who also developed CVST. And he also had positive anti-PF 480 bodies.
We still have a significant number of individuals that were just recently vaccinated. And so they
haven't passed through this, say, six to 13 days after vaccination. So we won't reach that until
April 25th. And at that point, we'll have a true number on what is the number of these
events that are happening after vaccination. There's a lot of speculation. I think there's
growing evidence that this may be a similar phenomenon to what we are seeing as a rare issue
with the AstraZeneca vaccine. And there were a couple publications in the New England Journal
of Medicine that shed some light on what might be happening there. And by comparison, I'll try to
get a connection here. So the original article, thrombotic thrombocytopenia after Chaddox 1,
and COVID-19 vaccination was published. And the authors report that of the 11 original patients,
nine were women, median age of 36, and a range of 22 to 49 years of age. Beginning
five to 16 days after vaccination, the patients presented with one or more thrombotic events
with the exception of one patient who actually presented with a fatal intracranial hemorrhage.
Of the patients with one or more thrombotic events, nine had cerebral venous thrombosis,
three had spanknic vein thrombosis, three had pulmonary embolism, four had other thrombosis,
and of these patients six died, five patients had disseminated intravascular coagulation.
Now the authors used a standard ELISA to detect these platelet activating antibodies against
PF4 and a modified PF4 enhanced platelet activation test to detect platelet activating antibodies
under various reaction conditions. Included in this testing were samples from patients who had blood
samples referred for investigation of these vaccine-associated thrombotic events with 28
testing positive on a screen. And so the authors suggest that we refer to this as vaccine-induced
immune thrombotic thrombocytopenia. So that, the ITT. Same addition, there was a brief report,
very similar name, thrombosis and thrombocytopenia after Chaddox1 and COVID-19 vaccination.
And they really came to the same conclusion. So what is going on here? What is this PF4?
So PF4 is platelet factor 4, or also known as chemokine CXCl4. It's a protein that's found in
the alpha granules of platelets. And it's involved in the clotting cascade. So we see a very similar
phenomenon rarely with a medicine we use called heparin. So it's very similar. You may have heard
the term hit or heparin-induced thrombocytopenia. And what we're seeing here is really a consumption
of our platelets followed by, well, bleeding in one instance, but in most cases, clotting.
And we do feel, you know, I have to say, there is a smoking gun here. It looks like there is a
connection. It looks, and we will see the true numbers right now. We're talking about one in a
million. AstraZeneca is about one in 600,000. So as we go forward, we'll have to see what the
numbers are. Now, does it make sense for them to have pause from a scientific point of view? Yes.
If we are able to pause for another week or so, we will actually have that 13 days after the last
J&J was given in the US. We'll be able to see if there's any more of these events. And then we
can revisit this. And on the call today, they actually talked about several options here. One
was to just put this in context and say, okay, the rate is, let's say, 1,500,000, whatever they
want to say. There may be the ability to say, this is isolated to individuals under the age of 50.
This may be isolated to women. So there may may be discussions about what do we do at the vaccine
relative to restricting or targeting certain populations. So I think it's the right thing to
do. And I think it's also reassuring to see what a robust adverse event reporting system we had.
I know I think we had an email where someone asks like, you know, how many people need to die
before we'll find out about it? I think the answer, as I said, was 1, and that's what it was here.
We had a connection here. One person has died in the entire country. And this has been stopped
until we clarify the issue. Now, people will concern we're in the middle of a pandemic here.
Are we stopping our vaccination efforts? I'm going to give some reassurance to our listeners.
If you look at the number of vaccines that have been given so far, this makes up a small part
of the number of vaccines. As I mentioned, we have given almost 200 million doses of the Pfizer
and the Moderna vaccine. We have given less than 7 million of the J&J vaccine.
And going forward, if anything, we have a vaccine glut, especially getting sort of
looks from around the world. What are you doing with all those vaccines? We expect that we will
have the ability by May 31st to have enough vaccines to fully vaccinate 260 million Americans,
even without J&J being an option. So this was something that we could really do
without making any huge sacrifice or impact on our ongoing, really robust vaccination efforts.
So as we learn more, and I think by next week, we might have a little more information,
the following week, we should have all the information and know where we're headed with this
this challenge. Passive vaccination. We actually have some good news here. We are really moving
forward with monoclonal cocktails. And as well, as about a week ago, the NIH, the National Institute
of Health, is now recommending that monoclonals are part of the treatment. So they are now part
of the NIH's COVID-19 treatment guidelines. And so they are saying for a mile to moderate COVID-19,
who are at risk of worsening disease, they should be treated with monoclonal antibody
cocktail. So that's a pretty strong statement. So I feel bad. I feel like we fall down on the job
here sometimes. I have a couple instances happen. I have a gentleman right now in the ICU who will
probably die. And the situation here, he and his wife were diagnosed. They were offered monoclonals,
maybe not as persuasively as it should have been. The wife said certainly. Two days later,
she was fine. Symptoms resolved. The husband is now in the ICU on ventilator, week three. I don't
think he's going to make it. And that's the second of those stories in just a few weeks here that
I've experienced where two married couple are offered therapy. The wife, maybe women are smarter
than men. Just throwing that out there. Say, yes, the men decide they're going to just see how it goes.
It doesn't always go well. So okay. So what are the news? We've got a few more phase three trial
results. Phase three treatment trial in recently infected asympto, asymptomatic patients showed
regenoron coved. And this is Casa ribbon map with imdebemab significantly reduced progression
to symptomatic COVID-19. So this was another phase three trial. It enrolled 204 individuals
with any COVID-19 symptoms who tested positive for SARS-CoV-2, but did not have antibodies at
baseline. And so they were randomized to either receive the regenoron cocktail or placebo. And
they reported that they reduced the overall risk of progression by 31% with a p-value of 0.038.
They also go on to report that the total number of weeks that patients experience symptoms which
decreased by 45% with the cocktail and the viral burden was reduced by more than 90%. So while
not included in the initial analysis plan, they also found that zero of the patients that got
the cocktail compared to six placebo patients ended up in the hospital or visited the ER during
this 29-day efficacy assessment period. And from a safety standpoint, there were no issues.
We also have a phase three prevention trial. And I think this is huge. It was an article
recently looking at people with immune compromise saying, what about these people? What they can't
actually respond well to a vaccine? Is there any way to passively protect them from the virus?
And so there was a phase three prevention trial showing 81% reduced risk of a symptomatic SARS-CoV-2
infections with subcutaneous administration of the regenoron cocktail. So this prevention trial
was a double-blind placebo-controlled trial assessing the effect of the regenoron cocktail
on uninfected individuals without SARS-CoV-2 antibodies or any symptoms who lived in the same
household as an individual who tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 within a period of four days prior
to enrollment. So they enrolled 1,505 individuals, pretty much split one-to-one getting the cocktail
versus placebo. And then they followed them out. And remember, this is a subcutaneous injection.
This doesn't have to be IV. It's another way of improving access. They reported 72% protection
against symptomatic infections in the first week and 93% in subsequent weeks p-values with about
three zeros each after the decimal. They also reported, and I think this is important,
an impact on severity of disease. So for those who did go on to get infected,
on average, the individuals who were treated with the cocktails experienced a symptomatic infection
and their symptoms resolved in about a week compared to the placebo group who were sick
on average for three weeks. The infected individuals also cleared the virus faster. So there was a
significant reduction in the days with a high viral load by 90%. And again, from a safety point
of view, there were no concerns here. So what's the future with monoclonals? A couple things to
say here. Is there really this invariant region? And we can just target that if the spike could be
set forever? Can we make this perfect monoclonal and just sit on our laurels? I'm not sure that
that's true. I'm not sure that there is a part of the spike protein that does not vary.
Emailing with David Ho today who does not believe that there's actually a part of the spike that
cannot, will not change. So I think that this is going to be an ongoing challenge. And I've been
reaching out and communicating with my colleagues at UnitedHealth Group about how important it is
that we have regional guidance, regional access to the monoclonal cocktails, the monoclonal therapies
that work the best in a given region based upon which variants are circulating and what resistance
patterns they might have to the different monoclonal. So what's the best thing we can do to stay ahead
of the virus? It's to reduce the opportunity of the virus to replicate and change, which means
mitigation, means vaccination. Period of detectable viral replication, right? This is when that person
comes in positive. Just a little touch on here because I'm going to close with some discussion
of anticoagulation. At this point in time, we're basically saying we have no compelling evidence
that starting people on aspirin, starting people in anticoagulation is helpful. The first week of
illness is the time for monitoring and monoclonals. If they have a specific high risk feature, then,
of course, always use your judgment and the latest clinical data to recommend for your patients.
Their early inflammatory phase, remember that 94% is what we're worried about. So ideally,
we've got a lot of pulse oxes out there in the community. Remember, steroids are not during
the first week. It's during that second week, if needed. And I am going to comment here,
where are we with anticoagulation? Should they end up in the hospital? We are universally
recommending anticoagulation. And I'm going to skip here to the tail end because we're running
long and I apologize. But I just wanted to revisit the post discharge anticoagulation guidelines
because they have evolved over time. And currently, as per the NIH treatment guidelines,
prophylaxis after hospital discharge is not recommended for patients with COVID-19.
There's currently no ash guidelines addressing this issue. There will be, we're working on them.
But I think the consensus has been, as we look at the data, this population is not necessarily
at a higher risk of post discharge clotting complications than your general medical patient.
So use the same post discharge anticoagulation guidance you normally would. Person has cancer.
Person has a clotting propensity. Person has another indication. Go ahead, use anticoagulation.
But if they just came in the hospital for their five days of remdesivir,
for their 10 days of steroids, it may be that offering anticoagulation, the dox, the eliquis,
the zorrelto that may be doing more harm than good. So all right, I will conclude there.
And again, I want to thank everyone. We're just a couple of weeks here left in our American
Society of Tropical Medicine fundraiser. So take a deep breath, go to parasiteswithoutporters.com,
click that donate button, because we are going to, because they were hoping, I see we are going to
support the American Society of Tropical Medicine in creating three annual meeting travel awards
to bring early career women from economically challenged parts of the world to the annual
meeting this fall really helped do something to push their career forward and undo and address a
lot of the inequities that are here. So thank you very much again. Time for a couple of
questions for Daniel. You can send them to Daniel at microbe.tv. The first is from
Jay. My daughter has celiac disease, irritable bowel lactose intolerance and has migraines.
We were so happy when she managed to get the J&J vaccine. She suffered only mild chills
about to switch birth control for one that has no estrogen. But what does one need to be aware of
for symptoms? Yeah, yeah, that's actually interesting. You know, the, I'm not sure where
exactly the question is going, but I'll go with it anyway. My daughter actually sent me a graphic
looking at the risk of clotting complications with different therapies. And one of the things
in there was birth control, right? Birth control can actually increase a woman's risk
of having clotting issues. We definitely strongly recommend women on oral contraceptive pills do
not smoke. Smoking is another issue. You know, if we're concerned here about the J&J complications,
I will be reassuring. You know, we're looking at this being less than the risk of getting
struck by lightning, certainly much safer than driving to and from a vaccine appointment.
But everyone, it looks like either acutely came in with a severe headache or soon thereafter
developed headache. So we're advising people after the J&J vaccine across the board,
if you develop a severe headache, if you have trouble breathing, if you have abdominal pain,
then get evaluated. And we can actually do blood work. We can, we can sort out whether or not this
is a significant concern. I know we had a ton of individuals, the ERs, over the last couple days,
you know, worried about these issues. But again, this is very rare. So I really want to
reinforce that. There's no recommended treatment at this point. We're not recommending putting
an umbrella on aspirin or anticoagulation with an event as rare as this seems to be.
We're more likely to do harm than than anything beneficial.
All right, Mary writes in a recent clinical update, you said if a school plan results in lots of
potential exposure, then the plan is not a good one. The school needs a better plan.
I'm a high school teacher. We have been doing cohorted hybrid days in September. We're being
forced to come back full in person after a few weeks in a few weeks instead of 12 kids in a room
with six foot distancing will now have 25 to 28 kids in a room with three foot. The CDC guidelines
say anyone within six feet for more than 15 minutes would be considered a close contact would have
to quarantine. In that case, a single positive student in six classes throughout the day could
yield as many as 36 contacts in the building, given the limitations of space in our building
and the CDC guidelines on close contacts. I don't see how there could be a return to a school plan
that does not result in a lot of potential exposures. Do you have any advice on this?
This is an excellent question and I think hits right on what I talked about. A lot of parents
had this as a disconnect. You just told me that if the children are three feet apart and wearing
masks, that is not a risky behavior. But yet you're telling me that if the kids are three feet apart
and someone has COVID, if they're both wearing masks, it doesn't matter. It's an exposure. So
there really is a disconnect here. So I know some local health departments have worked with the
school and said, no, this doesn't make any sense. But this is reaching out to the CDC.
We need this guidance on a national level. I think it's great now that the CDC is here
sort of back giving us really helpful guidance. And I think it's just a matter of getting the
guidance updated to be consistent with what we now know. Mask wearing can be successfully
enforced in the schools. If the kids are wearing masks, if you as a teacher and the kids are wearing
a mask and you're keeping this separation, this is a very low risk activity. Also go get vaccinated,
right? That's that's one of the biggest things we can do here. And if you look at our high schools,
a chunk of the kids, right, or 60 and 17. So the more people you get vaccinated, the better,
good ventilation systems, three feet is going to give you that 80% reduction. You throw a mask on
either side of that three feet. Yeah, otherwise, I think your math is exactly what I worry about.
You know, one child, six different periods, every time they're sitting surrounded by eight
kids. Next thing you know, everyone's in quarantine. We were only in school for a day.
One more from Ellen who talks about the discussion we had about pulling back on the
I am injection for the vaccine. And she has a question, which is what might be the consequences
of inadvertent IV administration of the vaccine? Someone I know came to me with a concern that
one of the vaccines he gave did, in fact, go IV, which he believes based on feel of having hit a
vessel by followed by continuing to inject before his brain and muscles had time to react to this
unexpected sensation. I realize there's no data, but would appreciate thoughts on what would be
theoretically expected in this case. The vaccine in question was MRNA. But I suppose in either case,
we would have the recipe for spike protein, as I call it, within circulation. Would this lead to
uptake and spike production within the vessels? If so, could this be related to rare clotting
issues seen with AZ and now J and J? And would it move out of the bloodstream and be used in a
similar but less localized way than in IM? Your insight is always much appreciated.
Yes, I am speculating here, but I will share like what my experience. So, you know, I was doing a
lot of vaccines this last week. We did over 300 last week. We actually did over 100 J and J just
Friday, right before the pause was triggered. And, you know, I always ask the people before I give
them a shot, I say, oh, are you a bleeder? And one of my partners, Nujali, who I mentioned earlier,
she was like, well, why do you do that? And some people, you give them a shot and they bleed.
The majority of the people we are giving these shots to, when you're done, they don't even need
a bandaid. They're fine. But a certain percent of them will bleed. Sometimes it prompts them to let
me know that they're on a blood thinner or something like that. But sometimes you do the shot and
actually they really start bleeding and you have to apply pressure and put a bandaid, which is not
consistent with this concept that we have been told that the deltoid, there's no blood vessels
there. It's very small capillaries. There is some vascularity to a deltoid, particularly in
someone who's maybe more active, et cetera. So I don't think we're quite clear on what's going on
here. You know, significant bleeding sometimes in some of these individuals suggesting a larger
vessel than, you know, we've sort of been led to believe when we talk about the pulling back the
plunger. But let's move on to the next level. The issues that we're seeing do not appear to be
that the vaccine is nestled in the blood system. What we're actually seeing is an immune response.
We're seeing six to 13 days later. We're seeing antibody production. These antibodies are against
a certain target, PF4, so platelet factor four. I don't necessarily think getting in the circulation
explains it. If anything, a good robust immune response is what explains this. So I understand
the concept of pulling back on the plunger, but I'm not sure I would understand the mechanism.
That's COVID-19 clinical update number 58 with Dr. Daniel Griffin. Thanks again, Daniel.
Oh, thank you so much, and everyone be safe.
