This week in virology, the podcast about viruses, the kind that make you sick.
From MicrobeTV, this is Twiv, this week in virology, episode 747 recorded on April 22, 2021.
I'm Vincent Racken-Yellow, and you're listening to the podcast All About Viruses. Joining me today
from New York, Daniel Griffin. Hello, everyone. Well, as you requested, Daniel, you got the 747,
so you can have the upper deck. Okay, I'm very, I'm very excited. So we are Twiv 747. What
clinical update number are we up to? This is clinical update number 59. Okay, wow. All right.
You know, I always have this. It's actually a rear current hope that I will have nothing to
talk about, but fortunately that hope is yet to come to pass. So let me start with my quotation.
We have a lot to cover today. Unfortunately, we have not run out of things to talk about.
And we'll start off with a quotation from Hegel. And I've seen several sort of versions of this,
but this one I think is sort of straight to the point. And we learn from history that we do not
learn from history. I think that that's fortunately a little prescient with how we are doing now.
And I'm hoping that at one point we're going to break from that. So last week, I talked about
the impact that COVID has had on healthcare workers here in the US. And when I look at what's
going on around the world, it actually seems like things are pretty good, you know, here in the US
by comparison. But I was on a call recently with a physician in his 60s, right? Most physicians
tend to work for quite a number of years into their later years. I think it takes us so much time
and training to get there. But this gentleman in his 60s told me that he was retiring this spring.
And it really occurred to me that it seemed like many of my colleagues more than sort of in a
usual year have been mentioning that they're either have retired or planning on retiring
in the coming months. And so it was actually a poll I just saw today, so hot off the press.
And this was a poll done by the Washington Post and the Kaiser Family Foundation,
Frontline Healthcare Worker Survey. And they actually found that about 30% of healthcare workers
polled sort of right at this point in time were considering no longer working in healthcare.
And William Blond wrote a really what I thought was an excellent piece in the Washington Post
about this titled burned out by the pandemic, three in 10 healthcare workers consider leaving
the profession. And some of the quotations I found to be actually very emotional and actually sort of
in line with some of the experiences that my colleagues have shared with me. So I thought I'd
just start off with this. You feel expendable. You can't help thinking about how this country
sent us to the front lines with none of the equipment needed for the battle said Sharon
Griswald, an emergency room doctor in Pennsylvania. Most of us got into this to save lives. But when
death is blowing around you like a tornado and you can't make it that in any of it, it makes
your question whether you're making any difference said Megan Brunson, a night shift nurse Dallas.
So continues to be tough. I saw a lot of discussion about physicians being a bit frustrated feeling
like, you know, we've done so much and been through through so much. And we ask little things like
would people wear masks? Would they give us a little more time? And people are not necessarily
willing to do the little things like wearing a mask and making smarter decisions. So, you know,
big focus this last week has been on the J&J pause. So I will get back. We'll spend some time on that.
Children in COVID, there is continued attention to the risk benefit of COVID
and decisions around children. Summer's approaching and I don't know if our listeners know, but I
do a lot of advising for for camps for summer programs, schools as well. I really feel like
there are important decisions to be made here and I'm almost trying to provide information about
that. So as we go forward, I'm going to make sure we get back to these important decisions.
Basically, what can we do to make these activities a safe option, safe choice for our parents,
for our kids, pre exposure period. So here's an article SARS-CoV-2 seropositivity and subsequent
infection risk in healthy young adults, a prospective study. So this was the Lancet.
And I think we discussed a little bit about this when it was out in pre-print, but it's no,
no, out there published. So this analysis was performed as part of the prospective COVID-19
health action response for Marines study. Charm, this acronym there. It was predominantly looking
at male US Marine recruits aged 18 to 20. So 92% of these were men, just really at sort of the makeup
of these US Marine recruits, 8% were women. They enrolled 3,249 participants. And it was a mix.
Some of them had had COVID before and were seropositive. Some were not. So they looked specifically
at the 189 seropositive individuals. They went through a whole sort of recruitment like quarantine
process. They made sure they were negative. They kept them for two weeks in a sort of quarantine,
with checking PCRs, really wanting to verify that when they entered trading, they were not PCR
positive. I don't think they were doing this because they were trying to do a study. They
were doing this because they were trying to prevent an outbreak. But unfortunately, there was an
outbreak. And among these 189 seropositive participants, young, healthy, mostly males,
10% of them went ahead to become PCR positive during a six week follow up. So I just want to
sort of point that out to people, you know, people say, Oh, you're at low risk. Actually,
here were zero positive young healthy individuals, 10% of them went ahead and actually were re-infected
during a six week follow up period. This was a lower percentage than the people who were
seronegative and had never had it before. And they actually go ahead and conclude. And they say,
although anybody's induced by initial infections are largely protective, they do not guarantee
effective SARS-CoV-2 neutralization activity or immunity against subsequent infection.
So my takeaway among this was that, yeah, young fit adults can get re-infected even with positive
antibody tests. So 10% went right ahead to get re-infected despite having those antibodies.
Just a little more support as if we don't as if we needed or don't for people to go ahead
and get infected. I go ahead and get vaccinated, not infected. You know, I see this and I'm hearing
it, you know, patients now, I just try to ask like, so hey, you know, here we are. It's April.
You're on the menu to the hospital with COVID. What was the story with the vaccine?
And I keep hearing, oh, I was told I was supposed to wait. I think maybe back in January, I might
have had COVID. So I'm waiting. I'm told I'm supposed to wait like, you know, a period of time. So,
you know, don't wait. Do not miss your opportunity to get vaccinated. Don't go to the doctor and
follow your antibody levels thinking that that offers some evidence that you're not going to get
infected. I had an individual recently, you know, to say it's an older individual. They were
they were infected in January, you know, and here they are back. It's April and they're in the
hospital. So just just want to want to say that those positive antibody tests are not really a way
for you to decide not to worry and and to wait to get vaccinated. Transmission. Now people are
very passionate about this topic and I'm always happy to return here. It gets both love and mostly
hate mail. What do we call that? That is constructive criticism, which we in science communication
are supposed to develop a skill at handling. What we have learned and what we discussed last
with was that the virus is rarely transmitted by surfaces. I think everyone is very comfortable
with this sort of calculation. The CDC is suggesting that perhaps maybe one in every 10,000 cases
was due to fomites or surface transmission. I actually think my my favorite, most accurate and
perhaps least controversial statement by the CDC moves on to COVID-19 is most commonly
spread during close contact and can also spread by airborne transmission. And this is from the
CDC page how COVID-19 spreads last updated October 28, 2020. So really nothing new right there, but
just it has been acknowledged that airborne transmission is a possible way that people can get COVID-19.
For healthcare settings, it's important for us to understand when airborne transmission could
occur. And I've tried repeatedly to return to situations outside healthcare settings where we
are seeing this as an issue. So this is the classic suburban home, where as the CDC points out,
these transmissions occurred within enclosed spaces that had inadequate ventilation.
Sometimes the infected person was breathing heavily, for example, while singing or exercising.
A little more information on masks. We saw a research letter fitted filtration efficiency of
double masking during the COVID-19 pandemic. This was published in JAMA Internal Medicine
April 16th. And the authors looked at double masking. They were reporting on fitted filtration
efficacy, FFE. Now, what is that? They explained and I quote in brief, FFE corresponds to the
concentration of particles behind the mask expressed as a percentage of the particle concentration in
a sodium chloride particle enriched chamber measured during a series of repeated movements of the
torso head and facial muscles as outlined by the occupational safety and health administration
quantitative fit testing protocol. Yeah, did anyone really get that? Basically, what they're
doing is they're having people move all around and they're measuring how much gets through the mask,
sort of a percentage of what's outside and what gets sucked in through the mask. This is actually
interesting. This is looking at masks protecting you where previously we've discussed a lot about
masks protecting other people. And as altruistic as I know all our listeners are, a lot of listeners
are interested in how well do the masks protect us. We are not measuring what gets out into the
environment, but what gets sucked in through the mask or masks. And they concluded that wearing a
medical procedure mask underneath a cloth mask provided the best improvement to FFE of all the
combinations they evaluated. They reported that if you're wearing one of these procedure masks,
and then you go add a single cloth mask over one of these medical masks, which actually people
can now buy you can order them. They're these sort of blown weaved masks. You get an additional
four to 14% protection by putting that over there. But what they point out, and I think I try to
harp on this as well, it's really fit, not so much material that is really a critical factor in
masks protecting us. Now, the study had limitations. It was only done on, as they say, one female
volunteer and two male volunteers with shaven faces. I thought that was interesting. They didn't
have the comment there about the female volunteer. It's also not the result I wanted, right? I have
to say, I wear a mask. I hate to have to wear two masks. I would have preferred it if they
demonstrated that just wearing that procedure mask was great stuff. But that's the problem
with science. You get the truth, not confirmation of what you want to be the truth.
I thought I would throw a case in here of a woman that I'm currently taking care of who is
100 years old. She's in the hospital. And I was asking, what happened? Who went to kindergarten
and learned that they should share? And she described that she was living in her home.
She was waiting to get vaccinated because she just hadn't been able to navigate the system.
And then one of her family members who had COVID came to visit her. This family member visited
her indoors. She actually said it was about 20 minutes. They were nice and close. They were
within that six foot zone. Nobody was wearing a mask. And yes, about five days later, she started
to feel poorly, went on to test positive for COVID. And now she's in the hospital on increasing
amounts of oxygen, nuanced at atrial fibrillation. She's now developed delirium. So this is the
story we usually hear, right, is that two people are within a certain period of time. The suburban
home is really a death trap. And they're not wearing masks. And I'm not quite sure I understand
why someone who has COVID would be visiting their 100 year old family member testing. Never miss an
opportunity to test. It's been a long time coming, but we now have access to in-home rapid antigen
testing, thanks to bynex. Now we have this $25 test available here in the US. Recently,
is this is something you could order on the computer and have sent to your home in six packs,
10 packs, 1,000 packs, actually. But they are now coming to a pharmacy near you. They do not
require physician access. They are not lick a sticks. These are lateral flow antigen tests. They
involve you swabbing the front of your nose with one of these little Q-tips and then sticking it
into this prepared card and waiting about 15 minutes. There's a little sort of bar scan code
there that you use your phone to scan in your computer. And these actually started shipping
to the major pharmacy chains on April 19. So really going to improve people's access to testing.
It's still not at the price point that we would all like. We would like the test to be cheaper.
People have actually gotten pretty comfortable with the nose swab. So I'm not too concerned that
it needed to switch over to a lick a stick, but we would like it to be less expensive. Because if
you think about this, this is going to be an equity issue again. You know, for some people,
$25 to get a test is no big deal. For many of us, $25 a test starts to add up. If it isn't already
a barrier, just right off the bat. Active vaccination. Here we are. Never miss an opportunity to vaccinate.
Never waste a vaccine dose. In the US, we have now shifted from arms searching for vaccines to
vaccines searching for arms. We are approaching in some parts of the country that time where
really vaccine hesitancy is going to be the next great hurdle. Here in New York, we saw executive
order 202.102. Now, what is that all about? Effective April 19th, as per this executive order,
they eliminated the $100,000 civil penalty for failure of a provider to administer their
allocated COVID-19 vaccine within seven days of receipt. I don't know if people are aware of this,
but here in New York, if I as a provider were to accept 100 200 vaccines, I had seven days to
get those into arms. If I did not report and get those into arms within seven days, I could face
up to a $100,000 civil penalty. You know, I mixed feelings about this. One is it's kind of nice
not to have that hanging over my head. But I am hoping those vaccines don't end up just sitting
in refrigerators. I will point out, Moderna, when it arrives, you pop it in the refrigerator. It
can stay there for 30 days. It shouldn't. Pfizer comes in those thermal shippers, which you can
reload every five to seven days with dry ice. Once you take them out, they can actually sit in
the refrigerator for up to five days. We're hoping that extends a little. They're just waiting to
get approval. But okay. We're not at J&J yet. Stay tuned. We did get an update on the impact of
vaccinations in the long-term care facility settings from the CDC, MMWR. Post vaccination
SARS-CoV-2 infections among skilled nursing facility residents and staff member Chicago,
Illinois, December 2020 through March 2021. And the authors reported here on 7,931
skilled nursing facility residents and 6,834 staff members that had received two doses of
COVID-19 vaccination in 75 Chicago-based skilled nursing facilities. In this group,
they reported, I'm going to use the word only 22 possible breakthrough SARS-CoV-2 infections
among the fully vaccinated persons greater than 14 days after their second dose of COVID-19
vaccinations. Two-thirds of these 22 were asymptomatic. A minority of persons with breakthrough
infections experienced mild to moderate COVID-19 symptoms. Two of the 22 required hospitalization
and one death that occur. There were no facility associated secondary transmissions
in this study. So I think this is really encouraging seeing such thousands of people being vaccinated
and seeing such a small number. But it does, as I like to point out, you are not bullet proof.
There were two of these individuals that required hospitalization. One person did die from COVID-19.
We also had an update on mRNA vaccine safety in pregnant women. This is huge. We can now say
that, yes, these vaccines have been studied in pregnant women. In the New England Journal of
Medicine on 4 slash 21, we saw the article preliminary findings of mRNA COVID-19 vaccine safety in
pregnant persons. And the authors reported on 35,691 v-safe participants. 16 to 54 years of age
identified as pregnant and found no safety signal. So I think this is really critical.
We're looking now at over 35,000. So this is the same number of total participants in the early
trials. We are not seeing safety signals. And this adds on to the data that a person who is vaccinated
during pregnancy can pass on protection to their, at this point, unborn and later born child. So
I think that that's going to help back to the J&J controversy. A couple of things I have to say
here. There was an Axios Ipsos poll. And they reported that over 90% of the public is aware of
the pause. They reported that the 91% awareness level is considered on par with or even a cut above
awareness of who won the Super Bowl. I tested this this morning in the ICU and we all got it wrong.
We knew it wasn't the Patriots. One person thought it was the Chiefs. I actually don't know if that's
true. But I will say they also reported that about 88% of the people that said they were aware of
this actually felt that the CDC and FDA were doing the responsible thing. Now, when this episode
becomes available, the emergency meeting of ACIP will take in place. We're recording this on
Thursday night. So that's hopefully going to happen Friday. And then this will drop Saturday.
Not as early in the morning as it used to, but I understand that. And we will hear what they
have to say. And so I won't weigh in. I mean, I guess I'll sort of guess on what they're saying.
The the hope is that they're going to allow us to continue to use this vaccine that there will
be a warning. So people are aware of what the what the risks are. Should they choose this as an
option versus the other vaccines. We're hoping, I'd say as providers, that there isn't any kind
of restriction that is forced on us, that this is something that we allow patients and providers to
have a dialogue about. I bring up my daughter Daisy Griffin who's been tweeting about this
and sort of putting out relative risks of other things. I mean, some of her comments,
you know, daddy, if I have if I are one of my friends have to drive like an extra hour to get
one of these other vaccines, I'm not sure that the risk of the vaccine is, you know, really a
great thing relative to the risk of us being in a car, you know, an hour each way, half an hour each
way. So we are hoping that we continue to have access because yes, I did say last time that we
still have plenty of vaccines. But not all the vaccines are used in the same way. When we had the
J&J shutdown, instead of people being vaccinated on their way out of the hospitals here in the
New York area, they were basically given a piece of paper with an email address to try to arrange
their vaccination. We also were using this, you know, kitchen workers people in harder to reach
populations who really had trouble coming for two sessions. So there's an equity challenge here.
So we'll see what happens. The Europe, Europe's health regulator, the European Medicines Agency,
the EMA on Tuesday, April 20 recommended adding a warning about rare blood clots with low blood
platelet counts to the vaccines product label for J&J and said that they felt the benefits of the
one-dose shot outweighed its risk. So we'll see what happens here in the US. All right, the incubation
period, the post exposure, you've been exposed. Remember, tests do not predict the future. There
is a two to 14-day incubation period, but they can help us detect infection prior to contagion.
So now that we have more testing, you know, once someone has been exposed, you know, if they're
doing a $25 test every day, you can quickly detect before they spread to other people. So I think
cheaper, better access to tests are going to really help us. So do not stop testing. Never miss
an opportunity to test. We've got to keep doing that. Now, what about the period of detectable viral
replication? So now you're starting to have symptoms. It's that first week. I like to say this is the
time for monitoring and monoclonals. So we actually got some interesting evidence here on passive
vaccination. There was what I think was a very nice article. The article was entitled Real-World
Experience of BAM, one of a map for COVID-19, a case control study. This was accepted for
publication in the Journal of Clinical Infectious Diseases. And the authors actually reached out
to them earlier today. So hopefully they're going to be a little more information. I had
questions, but they conducted a retrospective case control study across a single healthcare
system of non-hospitalized patients, aged 18 years or older, with documented positive SARS-CoV-2
testing, risk factors for severe COVID-19, and referrals for BAM-linevamav, the emergency use
authorization, right? So this is back when we were doing just BAM-BAM before we had shifted to the
monoclonals. They looked between November 20 and 2020 and January 19, 2021, at 218 patients that
received BAM-linevamav, and 185 who were referred, but some things in the way, and they ended up not
getting drugs. So these were the controls in this study. The 30-day hospitalization rate was
significantly lower among patients who received BAM-linevamav, 7.3%, versus 20%, relative risk 0.37,
p-value here of 0.001. So this was a real world reduction of greater than 60% with a very simple,
well tolerated treatment. If you dig down through this data, I think you may underestimate the impact,
because if someone has more severe risk factors, there's a little bit more of a push to make sure
they do go ahead and get that treatment. People at lower risk, so there may have been some impact
there. But another thing that really caught my attention, the authors comment on something that
they felt highlighted health inequities. They reported that they found white English-speaking
patients were more likely to receive therapy. Even though the materials are available in Spanish,
we are not doing a great job of making sure this therapy is out there. We've been moving,
as mentioned, past just BAM-BAM. We're now using cocktails and looking at second-generation monoclonals
and trials that are looking for EUA. I was actually on a call recently with Ben Wiegand,
and across the country looking at when, it was early mid-March that we switched using cocktails
across the country. I think we're feeling that that was an excellent decision, none too late,
not too early, definitely. Now, I also was on another call with,
well, I'll say, a member of the formerly called Operation Warp Speed. I feel like it's like
Prince or something. They needed a new name before. But one can take this as a glass half
full or empty, but over 400,000 monoclonal antibody treatments have been given to date when I was on
this call, more are already purchased by the US government and waiting to be administered. A couple
things here. That is small. I look at 400,000, and I say that's enough for about a week of people
getting infected. The whole IV infusion approach is a barrier, so there are some ongoing studies
looking at both subcutaneous and intramuscular injections. I think people can envision a world
where one is diagnosed, whether this is an ER, an urgent care, a primary care office,
immediately offered an injection right there at point of care with these really impressive
efficacy points. The early inflammatory phase, so this is if you've gotten through that first
week, you're entering into that second week. If the room air saturation, so your pulse ox gets
below 94%. This is when we consider steroids, remdesivir, and a coagulation for hospitalized
patients. And I wasn't sure where to put this paper, but I thought I would throw it in here.
There was an interesting, and I will say concerning, paper out of Columbia University,
published in brain, and it was COVID-19 neuropathology at Columbia University Irving Medical Center
New York Presbyterian Hospital. And the authors presented the clinical, neuropathological,
and molecular findings of 41 consecutive patients with SARS-CoV-2 infections who died
and underwent autopsy in our medical center. So here's the first caveat, right? Remember,
these people all died. So this may not be what is going on in every person with COVID's brain.
And so neurological examinations were done of 20 to 30 areas of each brain. And they saw
hypoxic ischemic changes. So these areas not getting enough oxygen, not getting enough blood
supply. They saw this in all the brains. They saw large and small infarcts. So think of those as
strokes. Many of these appeared hemorrhagic, so bleeding into the brain. They also saw activation
of the microglial cells with microglial nodules and accompanied by neuronephagia, most prominently
in the brainstem. neuronephagia. So that's our word for today. That's actually the microglial
cells. So the immune cells in the brain are actually eating your neurons. So really a frightening
thing to be happening here. They reported that they saw only sparse T lymphocytes,
so T cells in either perivascular regions or in the brain parencoma. And many of the
brainses would be expected contained atherosclerosis, so hardening of the arteries of the large arteries,
arterial sclerosis. But none had any evidence of vasculitis, so inflammation of the blood vessels.
Now they went on, they examined multiple fresh, frozen, and fixed tissues from 28 brains for
the presence of viral RNA and protein using a whole bunch of techniques. And anybody's directed
against the spike in nucleocapsid regions of SARS-CoV-2. The PCR revealed low, very low,
but detectable viral RNA levels in the majority of the brains. And they performed something called
RNA scope, which is like an in situ hybridization technique looking, an amino histochemistry. And
this all failed to detect viral RNA or protein in the brains. Maybe people listen to TWIV 746,
where there was a whole discussion about how a virus can sometimes get into the brain or not.
And these authors concluded that these findings suggested that it was really
not virus getting into the brain. It was really microglial activation,
these microglial nodules, this neuronal phagia, these immune cells eating nerves,
that was really causing what was going on and not direct viral infection of the brain
parenchyma. And there also was probably a synergistic contribution from the hypoxia
and the ischemia. Now we're going to move on to the tail phase long COVID. So we had a long
episode last week. So I saved this one for now. Is it a bit of good news to end on? Let's see. So
in the JAMA network, open the article, mortality among US patients hospitalized with SARS-CoV-2
infection in 2020 was published. This was a retrospective cohort study, including patients
who were hospitalized for at least one day at one of over 200 US acute care hospitals
between March 1 and November 21, 2020. And they reported on 503,409 admitted patients
and found that in-hospital mortality declined across all age groups during the period evaluated.
Overall, in-hospital mortality peaked in April of 2020. I think we can remember that horrible
month where the in-hospital mortality was 19.7 and then decreased significantly to November,
where it was down to 9.3%, still unacceptably high. Really nice article. Go ahead and I'm going to
actually say, once you finish this or you're driving or in stop, look at this article. They
have a really beautiful figure where they show that this trend was apparent for all age groups.
The older you were, the higher the mortality, thus the greater the decrease. But this was apparent
across all age groups. So we are doing better at all ages. The mortality that we're seeing is lower
in hospital. And this is reflected in part because we have younger people. But it also is that we
are getting better at taking care of these people. At an individual age adjusted, we are decreasing
the mortality. So I'm going to end on that note before we go to emails. We are nearing the end
of our fundraiser. Donations made to parasites without borders. Go to parasiteswithoutborders.com.
We are going to contribute to the American Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene. They
left out hygiene last time. And we never want to leave out hygiene. We are going to, and I think
we're going to get there to give them $40,000 to support three travel awards, helping women,
qualified early career investigators working in tropical medicine to attend the annual meeting.
So help us support these. It's actually women, low income countries coming to this meeting and
help do what we can to address some of the inequities. Time for a few emails for Daniel.
If you'd like to send one, send it to Daniel at microbe.tv. First is from Avital, who is a single
mom with a seven year old daughter, just got her second shot of Moderna. She sends a picture
of getting the shot with her twiv t-shirt. So that's becoming a thing. People are sending us
their photos with their twiv t-shirts. Wonderful. Love it. In a couple of weeks, she writes,
when I'm fully vaccinated, we're going to go fly back home to Montana. My daughter will go to camp.
The camp is doing all the right things, wearing N95 masks, face shields on the plane. The summer
camp is outdoors with COVID precautions. However, I know her risk of exposure will be increased.
In the case of an infection in the child, what would you suggest as far as a course of treatment
to try and avoid the inflammatory syndrome, which sometimes occurs? Also, do you have any general
guidance for vaccinated parents with unvaccinated children? All right. So there's a lot there.
I think you hit several points. I like the fact that you're aware in the KN95s on the airplanes,
in the airports. And I think we try to point out, as per the CDC, there's a respiratory droplet
component of transmission. There also can be an airborne component of transmission, particularly
when you're in these crowded indoor spaces, and you're not aware of how good the ventilation is
going to be. If a child gets COVID-19 that first week, one of the interesting things,
this has come up with several times, would they benefit? Would we reduce the risk of them getting
MISC-C or MISC-C? Is there anything we can do to prevent them to lower that risk? It is a low
risk. I do want to point that out. But we don't have a lot of great recommendations or proven
therapies that we can do during that first week. Just like an adult, if they move into that second
week and start having low oxygen saturations, then we extrapolate. And a lot of clinicians would
actually consider a sort of weight-based adjusted dose of steroids, oxygen support. And if they
get into week four, unfortunately, I'm not going to say that we have any great evidence that we
can prevent that. Part of that is the low risk relative to the risk of us doing anything,
then there have been treatments that are suggested. The camp, it sounds great that they're doing all
the right things. I was doing an interview recently where I talked about how do you know that the
camp is doing the right thing? Testing, right? There is now testing that is being paid for, provided,
for by the government. So if your child is going to a camp and they have a testing program ahead
of time to make sure kids don't show up with the virus, and then they have testing programs in
place once they arrive. I think of that as a marker. These are tests that the camp does not
have to pay for. Our tax dollars have already paid for these. If the camp is taking advantage
of that program, I think it shows that they're being proactive taking this seriously. And that's
probably the best thing you can do for your child. What is the best way to make sure a child does
not have issues with COVID is to make sure they don't get infected with COVID. And that should
be a way of keeping them safe. Avital points out that she's heard rumblings of a Pfizer pediatric
trial being set up in Pittsburgh where she lives. And she's hoping to enroll her daughter in that
trial. Our next one is from Gordon. Thanks for the good discussion on the use of masks. I'm puzzled
by the reluctance of authorities, including yourself to recommend the use of N95 respirators.
If you're trying to protect yourself against a potentially fatal infection, wouldn't it make
sense to use the highest level of reasonably obtainable protection? I know N95 respirators
were in short supply in 2020. But I think that's no longer an issue. You can certainly buy them on
eBay here in La Paz, Mexico. I can purchase a Chinese KN 95 at any pharmacy for $2. The ones I use
appear to be well made with the same materials you would find in a 3M N95. Is it that old bugaboo?
We don't have the data to show they are needed or better. Personally, I'm not relying on a cloth
face mask that meets no mandated quality control or performance standards to protect me. But then
what do I know? I'm just a retired health and safety professional. Yes, just a retired health
and safety professional. No, I think you're I think you're on point with this. The data is
out there. We have a lot of evidence about different masks and their impact upon your safety.
If you told me, Oh, I'm a person who's immunosuppressed. I'm 92 years old. I'm planning on going to
a big indoor gathering. Yeah, I would want you wearing an N95 mask. I don't see a problem with
recommending that at all. If we're talking about physicians working in a setting where we have
good air exchange, if you're going to be outdoors able to distance yourself, then I'm not sure you
need to wear the N95. But as I think I mentioned, the woman traveling on an airplane when my wife
and daughter is actually Eloise. I think this time we're on an airplane at one point. I actually,
I advise them and they went ahead and listened to me crazy as that sounds. And they were a Ken and
K N95 the whole time that they were in transit. Once they got to the other side and were outdoors
off came the mask. My son Barnaby tells me that his mile time is impacted negatively when I have
them wear a K N95 on the cross country course on the track. But now I think that the data is out
here. The N95 does offer more protection. And I think as we talk today, if you're going to wear
one of these surgical masks, it looks like if you throw a cloth mask over it, you can increase
your protection as well. So we're still in the middle of a pandemic. There are areas in our world
and even here in this country where the rates are unacceptably high and the risks are unacceptably
high. So I think the science is out there to say that there are more effective masks that can
decrease that risk. And Teresa writes, I'm a nurse working in Canada. I was not given the Pfizer
vaccine because I had an anaphylactic reaction to depot lidocaine injection for frozen shoulder,
which does contain PEG polyethylene glycol doctors felt it could be a preservative that caused the
reaction. I was then given the AstraZeneca vaccine and now fall into that category of 55 and under
questionable about getting the second dose. What can be done for someone like me? Do you feel
there will be a change in the Pfizer vaccine and removing this ingredient? Now I'm worried I
won't be able to get any other vaccine. Any ideas? Yeah. So this is this is an excellent question.
And I think hits that really sort of practical advice here. When they've looked at the AstraZeneca,
the people who are having their reactions are having them after the first dose. We're not seeing
that then they go ahead and have them after the second dose if they tolerated the first one.
So the current recommendations are that if you tolerated the first AstraZeneca dose,
it is fine to proceed with the second AstraZeneca dose. I'll say that.
You can't really take the PEG 2000 out of the Pfizer or the Moderna. It's actually part of that
liposomal packaging. So it's not a preservative in that setting. So if you had an issue with
the Pfizer, with the Moderna, I think it's reasonable to look at the adenovirus vector vaccines,
completing your AstraZeneca here, J&J for individuals in other settings. And I think we're
hoping fingers crossed that we're going to hear about Novavax coming out as well. That's our pure
protein, sort of our Shingrix technology being applied now to COVID that we're thinking maybe
another option for people that have had issues with other vaccines. So looking forward to not
only more and more vaccines in the world, not just here in the US, but also looking at vaccines
that have different safety profiles may allow people to have a little more selection. And I see
that as positive for several things. One is that if people have the ability to have a choice,
if they have that agency, I think it helps a lot. It helps with vaccine hesitancy. People
who want to be told this is what you got when you sign up, you get what we tell you. People like
to have some involvement in decision making. So I think that's really positive. And I will say,
boy, we may have too many vaccines here in the US. We may have a glut. I liked an analogy I heard
that, yeah, it's fine to put that oxygen mask on yourself first before you help everyone else.
But don't leave for oxygen mask sitting in your lap. Let's get those oxygen masks on everyone as
well. That is COVID-19 clinical update number 59 with Dr. Daniel Griffin. Thanks again, Daniel.
All right. Thank you so much. And everyone, be safe.
