This week in virology, the podcast about viruses, the kind that make you sick.
From Microbe TV, this is Twiv, this week in virology, episode 749 recorded on April 29, 2021.
I'm Vincent Rackeniello, and you're listening to the podcast all about viruses. Joining me
today from New York, Daniel Griffin. Hello, everyone. How's this week been Daniel?
Things are getting a little bit better, to be honest, at least here in New York.
It's a little painful when I look at how things are going in the world, but let's get right into
it, because our quotation ties this together. There are two kinds of guilt, the kind that
drowns you until you're useless, and the kind that fires your soul to purpose. This is by
Sabah Tahir, a Pakistani American author. Right into that question, Vincent, that you asked me,
how are things going? Here in the United States, and most of the United States, we've really started
to come off of that plateau. Numbers are going down. We look at the numbers of patients in the
hospitals here in the New York state, and it's about 60 percent lower than it was a month ago,
so that's really coming down. It's often several days that I go without a patient with COVID
dying, actually. This is really changing the landscape. We are not where we were in April of
2020. We're in April of 2021, and it was just announced that July 1, New York City is going to
be full open 100 percent across the board. I think that we are seeing that vaccines are not
just tooled. They're the nuclear option. They really are our game changer, and we'll be talking
a little bit about that today. Things are not going well around the world. Around the world,
the cases are rising, the deaths are rising. We are still really in the middle of the pandemic.
This is why I sort of use this quotation as exciting as it is here in the US. I know
personally I feel a sort of sense of guilt, seeing how much other people are suffering,
and not wanting to say, let that make you feel useless. Let's all be asking ourselves,
what can we do to reach out now to the rest of the world now that I think we're really on our own
path here? Children and COVID. I mentioned, I promised last time that I would spend some time
talking about camp guidance, and we now have the CDC updated guidance for operating
youth and summer camps during COVID-19. You can Google away CDC, summer camp, and get this
really informative resource here. When I was younger, people don't know that I was once younger,
I was. My middle daughter, Eloise, actually, I think looks a bit like I did when I was younger,
except she's a lot better looking than I ever was. I used to work as a camp counselor at Camp
Jabberwocky. This was a camp out on one of the islands off the coast of Massachusetts for children
with cerebral palsy, spina bifida, down syndrome, other challenges. I look back on the time that
I spent there, and I think if we all take a moment, we realize how important camp is for so many
reasons, for so many different individuals, and to take an expression of my dad who says,
every vacation you don't take is a vacation you'll never take. Every summer, our kids don't have
an opportunity to go to summer camp. That's gone. That summer camp opportunity is gone. I've been
doing quite a bit pro bono work. I think I'm starting to push it with my wife. She's starting to say,
I need to stop doing so much of that. But I really think that this is a critical area, and so I've
been trying to do my part to help with a number of camps get set up for summer. But let's go through
what is the CDC telling us, and what can we think about for the summer for our children, for our
grandchildren, depending on where we are in life. So the CDC states that fewer children have gotten
sick with COVID-19 compared with adults during the pandemic. Children can be infected with the
virus that causes COVID-19. That's SARS-CoV-2. They can get sick with COVID-19. They can spread
the virus to others, and they can have severe outcomes. Now, I think this is an important
starting point. Children are at lower risk, but they are not at no risk. The CDC has a lot of
recommendations about how we are keeping our kids safe or how we can keep our kids safe.
They recommend that each camp have an emergency operations plan in place to protect the staff,
to protect the campers, the families, and then the communities. Remember, these camps operate in
areas which are often not as heavily populated as other parts. So if you bring COVID into these
areas, you're not just exposing the kids and everyone else, you're exposing the community.
There should be some minimum features in these plans. A lot of the camps, I have to say, are getting
these plans up. A lot of them are actually fully in place because probably expecting money from
the parents at this point. So they want to be able to have meetings. Actually, we had one last night
when Tila, well, after eight o'clock. First, we met ahead of time to go over our plans,
and then we spent over an hour with the parents answering questions. And so what are the topics
that should be in this emergency plan? One, and this is number one, the CDC is saying,
number one, strongly encourage vaccination for all eligible people. As I mentioned, this is a
game changer. We are seeing that the vaccines are more effective in real life than even we were
hoping when we saw the initial exciting studies. The other health screening for symptoms and
diagnostic or screening testing. So testing should be a part of the plan. That's number two right
after vaccine testing. And maybe we'll get into this a little more, but the government is working
with the states and providing testing opportunities for the camps, actually supplying testing in that
huge $2 trillion bill that went through, use multiple layers prevention strategies. So
we're still going to see masking in certain situations. We're still going to see physical
distancing. We're going to see cohorting and cohorting is a nice way to break this down
so that if there is an issue, it's not the entire camp. You're keeping it, you're keeping it sort
of contained. And then also a focus on the housing arrangements. And, and I think it's great,
right up front, improved ventilation. I think we've been trying to talk about the fact that,
you know, even though this is a respiratory droplet spread or respiratory virus,
if you take an indoor space, if you don't have ventilation, you start building up,
you start building up that six feet away is not going to protect you in an area with poor ventilation.
Think about kids sleeping together in these cabins with their staff. They also want you to start
thinking about the fact that not everyone's risk is the same. So think about campers and staff
that might have higher risks. Really a big push to promote outdoors. I kind of like this,
spending about 20 years of my life out in Colorado to see that, you know, the CDC now is recommending,
you know, promoting outdoor and lower risk activities. So, you know, I know people love
that that's singing in the mess hall. Let's get that singing outdoors. Traveling to and from,
you want to be thinking about that, you don't want to be creating exposure events on the way
to the camp. You also want to think about on the way off cleaning. They mentioned, right,
we're getting sort of down here. Remember, cleaning was number one in the olden days,
we're realizing this is not, this is something you get by breathing, not necessarily touching,
washing those hands. And then they go on to basically go through a lot of other things,
including where they finish with, have a plan in case someone gets COVID-19, have a plan
in case someone tests positive. And there's two sides, I'm going to say, if you get a positive
test, if you're doing a lot of testing, you're going to get false positive. So have a plan,
how do I quickly verify to see if this is true? How do I respond to those? So we're getting
great guidance here from the CDC on how to do this safely. We will have a layer where the states
are going to have individual guidance and actually mandates for how camps are going to operate.
They're going to give us specific numbers on if you're cohorting how big of those cohorts
allowed to be, what should be the ratio. So I think that's going to help here. But I think the
message here is that we can do this safely. Again, just like the schools, it can also be done
unsafely. So ask, ask your camp, what are your plans? Are you planning on following CDC guidance?
Are you planning on keeping my kids safe? Because as I keep re-array,
children are certainly at lower risk, but they're not at no risk. Pre-exposure period,
this has been an exciting week. CDC has really been out there this week. And on April 27,
the CDC came out with it. When you've been fully vaccinated, how to protect yourself and others
guidance. And I'm actually going to be, well, I think by the time this drops, I'll already talked
about this on the news, this fear of normal. How do we get back to normal and how can this happen?
So what did the CDC have to say? The first, let's define what does it mean as per the CDC
to be fully vaccinated? And they're using, just to keep it simple,
two weeks. They're saying two weeks after you finish your vaccine. So two weeks after you did
that, two dose Moderna Pfizer, two weeks after your J&J. People have probably known, I kind of
like four weeks after the J&J, but I won't break rags with the CDC on this one. But this is not
the day. This is not the night of your vaccine. Vaccines take a little time. So take that time,
let your body build up those T cells, those B cells, that immune protection. And then,
what can you do if you're fully vaccinated? As per the CDC, they're saying you can gather indoors
with fully vaccinated people without wearing a mask. That's pretty exciting.
You can gather indoors with unvaccinated people. And they're saying without masks,
they're talking about staying six feet apart. And they're also throwing in here, you want to be
careful if there's someone there who has increased risk of severe illness from COVID-19. Then,
and I like this part, you can gather or conduct activities outdoors without wearing a mask,
except in certain crowded settings and venues. So really doubling down on what we've learned.
If you are vaccinated, you are at much lower risk. If you're outdoors, that risk is about 20
fold higher than indoors. So we're starting to see things coming back. If you travel in the United
States, as per the CDC, you do not need to get tested before or after travel or self quarantine.
Remember, this is for the fully vaccinated. They do make some comments about international travel.
Really, the US isn't going to put a lot of onus on you. You're going to be needing to look at what
international destination you might be traveling to. What should you keep doing for now if you're
fully vaccinated, right? I think there was a wonderful beer commercial where the guy is all
excited. He's getting his vaccine and then he's going to go to the bar and do all these other
things. Well, what do they want you to keep doing? They say you should still protect yourself and
others in many situations by wearing a mask that fits snuggly. So let's say you're indoor,
public setting. There's a large number of people. There's going to be unvaccinated people,
including children, they point out from multiple households. So you're really still you're still
going to be wearing your mask in certain circumstances. You're visiting indoors with an unvaccinated
individual who's at increased risk. We're saying, boy, vaccination really makes you
much lower risk of transmitting to others. It does not make you no risk. And in this case,
if the stakes are high, they say you should still be avoiding those indoor, large gatherings. You
you don't want to go to that packed facility yet. At some point, maybe that will come.
And also, as we know, they still have a mask requirement if you travel. So even if you're fully
vaccinated, you're still required to wear a mask when you're on a plane, on a bus, on a train,
other other public transportation. They still want you to watch out for symptoms. As we've seen,
we do see breakthrough symptoms. Fully vaccinated people can still get COVID-19.
So if you have symptoms, you're still going to go. Don't stop testing. You're still going to go
get tested. And so I encourage everyone to go to the CDC site really look through this.
For some people, it's going to take a little time. I think other people just jump in the deep
end of the pool and they're good to go. I for one, I will mention I have a little trepidation. I
still have a fear of normal. It's going to take me a little time to ease back into things even
though I am fully vaccinated. Transmission. I always like to have a section where I push people's
buttons and get some criticism. So this will be it. In many ways, I think going through the camp
and the vaccinated guidance really helps us to answer a lot of the questions about transmission.
People are not, I think, as focused on the words as they are in really understanding
different circumstances and how to behave and how to be safe in those situations.
And I actually step out here and say, I think there was a disservice done early on
with the whole, is it airborne discussion? And perhaps the immortal words of Roxanne Comse,
maybe these will now become immortal. A headline of one of her pieces,
they say coronavirus isn't airborne, but it's definitely borne by air. The word airborne means
different things to different scientists and that confusion needs to be addressed.
Just I always like to sort of bring this back around again. Surfaces are low risk. Remember,
lots of hygiene theater, way too much bleach. Maybe one in every 10,000 cases came from surfaces.
Outdoors much safer than indoors. About 20-fold safer. Masks are effective for the wearer and
those around us. Air exchange is critical for indoor risk. Time matters and it is cumulative
for exposures. Vaccines are not just tools, as we're seeing. They are really the nuclear option for
ending the pandemic. And once people are fully vaccinated, once we get a larger percentage
of our population fully vaccinated, things do change. Things do really change in a positive way.
All right, testing. Never miss an opportunity to test. As we talked about the camps, as you saw,
number two right after vaccination was testing. So I want to keep reinforcing. We've seen a lot
of publications on this. I had one out there with some of my colleagues at UHG. And testing
is a critical part of this multi-layered approach to opening camps, schools, businesses, and other
venues. We should be doing more not less testing. We are doing less testing, to be honest. The data
is really compelling here. And one of the things that is compelling is we want more frequent,
so frequent testing. Rapid results. We want to avoid those resulting delays.
Test with testing, more is better. All right, active vaccination. This has been a busy area.
Never miss an opportunity to vaccinate and never waste a vaccine dose. We're starting to get to
the point here in the U.S. It's like throwing away food, right? Don't throw that dose in the
trash. Let's get it in someone's arm. We've definitely shifted here in the U.S. And I'm seeing
this firsthand from arms searching for vaccines to vaccines searching for arms.
Since we last talked, actually, this dropped after the meeting. But what happened with the
J&J vaccine? There was a meeting Friday, April 23rd. I asked my partners to cover so I could
listen to this. That just raises my geek factor, I guess, that I wanted to listen to this all day.
But a summary came out. So we saw published April 27th in the MMWR updated recommendations
from the advisory committee on immunization practices for the use of the Janssen Johnson
and Johnson COVID-19 vaccine after ports of thrombosis with thrombocytopenia syndrome
among vaccine recipients United States April 2021. So in brief, the advisory committee on
immunization practices concluded that the risks of resuming Janssen COVID-19 vaccination among
persons aged equal to or greater than 18 outweighed the risks and reaffirmed its interim recommendation
under the FDA's emergency use authorization, but included a new warning for rare clotting
events among women aged 18 to 49 for this thrombosis with thrombocytopenia syndrome or TTS,
as we'll be referring to it, or as other people refer to it as VITS vaccine induced
thrombosis with thrombocytopenia syndrome. So what did we know? What did we learn from this
publication and from the meeting? Nearly 8 million. So 7.98 million doses of the Janssen COVID-19
vaccine had been administered in the United States and the vaccine adverse event reporting
system. So VAERS received at the end of this prior to this meeting 15 reports of the TTS after
vaccinations. With the clots located, I think this is important in the cerebral venous sinuses
and other unusual locations, including the portal vein, the splenic vein, and a combination of
venous and arterial thrombosis. These 15 reports were confirmed by physician reviewers at the CDC
and the FDA. They went through and reviewed this, including having hematologists involved in the
review. 13 of the cases occurred among women aged 18 to 49. Two occurred among women aged
50 or older. And no cases post authorization reported among men. Remember, there was a man
in the trial, but he was not in this 15 person study here. So the TTS reporting rates were
7 cases per million. And the Janssen COVID-19 vaccines were administered to the 18 to 49.
We had 0.9 per million in the aged greater than 50 years. And then they broke it down into
different subgroups, which I'll go through actually. And what I'm going to do here is I'm going to
jump to, I'm going to give John hit some credit here. John hit at United Health Group actually
made some tables for me. Wasn't really for me there for the whole group, our sort of national
vaccine advisory panel. But what were the race? What were the cases of TTS per million vaccinations
broken down by age, right? So all age groups, 1.87. If you looked at people under 50, it was 7
per million, over 50, it was 0.9. And then you can break it down into other age groups as well.
Then there was the other and this came up where there are certain comorbid conditions or maybe
certain medications that we should be thinking about. What about obesity? 7 of the 12 had obesity,
8 did not. What about oral contraception? 13 were not, hypothyroid to hypertension to
no recent pregnancies. Interesting enough, no history of prior clotting disorders in this
population. So at the end of the report, and I'm going to sort of even make some comments here,
they basically went ahead and they said, okay, we are going to put this back out there.
We're going to put a warning on there and we're going to allow this to be a patient decision
ultimately. And I have to admit, when I've talked to a lot of physicians about this,
not all of them were as excited as I should say I was. And I think this is interesting, right?
Physicians like to be the ones who get to make decisions. And so here, we're basically saying
no, the patient will get the right certain physicians say I would feel better if we did not use this
vaccine in women under the age of 50. And I think that really take it as it is. They are saying
that's not the physician's decision. Here are the facts, it's the patient's decision. And we're
actually maybe starting to move into a realm where before we said take whatever vaccine you have
the opportunity to take. Now we're starting to see patients have preferences based on certain
things patient the other day. This was a woman in her 40s. She had a prior history of a pulmonary
embolism. We had a discussion and she was suggested to me that she would prefer to do a
Moderna over the J and J vaccine. I think that that's completely reasonable. If we're looking at
challenges with getting more vaccine uptake, giving people choice, letting them have agency,
I think that that's more important than physicians getting to have the final say on everything here.
We continue to have our vaccines against the variants race or what I like to call
vaccines against the variants of concern as well as behaviors of concern.
And we actually got to what I think are encouraging preprints that became available about the New
York variant. It's nice that we have our own variant. B1526 SARS-CoV-2 variant identified in New York
City neutralized by vaccine elicited and therapeutic monoclonal antibodies. And that
was available as a preprint. We also had detection and characterization of the SARS-CoV-2 lineage,
B1526 in New York. Now basically both papers demonstrated that vaccine serum showed a little
bit of a decrease, but remained at an elevated and protective level. Convalescent plasma did not
fare as well. The monoclonal cocktail by Regeneron continued to be effective. I think the take home
message here was that the vaccine still work against the variants. Don't count on protection
after natural infection quite as much as counting on the protection that we get with vaccination.
All right, the period of detectable viral replication, right, you test positive.
This is the time for monitoring and monoclonals so far. I think it's important that although this
may not impact our daily clinician as physicians, we do pay attention to what's happening around
the world. Maybe it will swing back. Maybe it will affect us, but I think it's also important for
us to be aware of what's going on. So there was an article, the global case fatality rate of COVID-19
has been declining since May 2020 published in the American Society of Tropical Medicine and
Hygiene Journal. So what's happening here? So the authors collected daily COVID-19 diagnoses
and mortality data from the WHO's daily situation reports and reported that based on this data,
the weekly global cumulative COVID-19 reported case fatality rate. So that's that R-CFR. I feel
like we're going back when we were first learning about the difference between case fatality rate
and reported case fatality rate. So these are cases reported. We have documented that this is
COVID-19. What percent of those individuals die? We know that the actual case fatality rate is
probably higher, where the actual infection fatality rate is probably higher. But we reached a peak of
7.23% in the last week of April, April 22 to 28 in 2020, right? So it's right about a year ago.
This was followed by a strong declining trend up until the 53rd week post peak right after this peak.
We ended up down at 2.2% in the last week of December 2020. Now why did this happen? And they had a
couple suggestions, right? So that's the data. They suggested that part of this was an increased rate
of infection in younger individuals, right? We know the younger individuals have a lower case
fatality rate. They also looked at a map of regional reported case fatality rates. So Yemen,
for instance, where I believe Dixon likes to go salmon fishing, they had a reported case fatality
rate of 30% April through December of 2020, while by comparison, the reported case fatality rate
overall in the US is 2% for all cases with an outcome. So I recommend people take a look.
It's worth looking at the different figures and seeing what's happened over time.
I keep saying this is the time for monitoring and monoclonals, but I am hoping that this will
change. We keep hearing from Pfizer that by the end of the year, they're promising us an oral
COVID pill. Now, what do we know about this? They're talking about a phase one study of a very catchy
PF07321332. So what is this? And what do we know? A little background here. So SARS-CoV-2
produces two large viral poly proteins. These are really long proteins that are going to need to
be chopped up. So PP1A and PP1AB. And these are processed by two virally encoded cysteine proteases.
Now, the main protease is also called 3C-like protease. So 3CL protease or 3CL-pro, and there's
a papain-like protease. So we initially heard about this product, or targeting this, with an
intravenous preparation. It was PF00835231. It'll be a test at the end. This was a pre-print
back in February, entitled Discovery of a Novel Inhibitor of Coronavirus 3CL protease
for the potential treatment of COVID-19. And now Pfizer is suggesting that they'll have the other
catchy PF07321332. On the market by the end of this year, they have started a phase one trial,
right? So that's hopefully we're going to have more tools. We also have been hearing from Merck
and Ridgeback Biopharmaceuticals that they've been working on malnupiravir. And this is a different
way, a different small molecule potential oral pill that can be used as an antiviral. This is a
ribonucleoside analog that they have found inhibits replication of multiple RNA viruses. This is
something they've been working with for a while. People who are familiar with HIV and age treatment
think of this much like AZT, where you're getting one of those building blocks of the RNA. So an A,
a C, a G, or a U, we target all these in HIV, and you replace one of these with an analog,
which then gets brought in and interferes with the virus replication. As we find out more about
this, I will certainly share that information. All right, so let us finish off here with the
tail phase long COVID or post COVID. And I think I'm going to call this it is not just about long
COVID. So early on, I fought against this narrow view, what people thought about COVID, the you're
either going to live or you die. And that's the end of it. Still, still unfortunately here to this
day from positions, just sort of this idea that people who are suffering, oh, it's all in their head.
But I think people are now appreciating, many more people are appreciating that it can be a lot
more than two weeks once COVID gets into your system, so to speak. But there's also an appreciation
that maybe there's something more than even just long COVID. I think this is a little discouraging,
but in nature, there was the article, high dimensional characterization of post acute sequelae of COVID-19.
Now, what is this about? So the authors in this article used the national health care databases
of the US departments of Veterans Affairs to systematically and comprehensively identify
six month incidents sequelae, including diagnoses, medication use, laboratory abnormalities in
30 day survivors of COVID-19. All right, so this is a really robust database. This cohort was five
million eight hundred and eight thousand zero one eight participants. And so this, this is a really
row bust data set that they were looking at. And within those alive, they were looking at the
COVID-19 group selected having a COVID-19 test that was positive before March 1st 2020 and November
30 or between I should say between March 1st 2020 and November 30th 2020. So in this large set,
they had found almost a hundred thousand individuals. And then they're going to look at these
individuals and what did what did they find? So this study identified a significant increase
in problems in this population that affected the respiratory system, the nervous system,
neurocognitive disorders, mental health disorders, metabolic disorders, cardiovascular disorders,
gastrointestinal disorders, malaise, fatigue, musculosceletal pain, anemia. This population
had an increased use of many medications, particularly pain medications, opioids, non opioids, antidepressants,
anxiolytics, antihypertensives, oral hypoglycemics. And they had evidence of laboratory abnormality,
abnormalities in multiple organ systems. So what I think I'm going to just really point out here
is that this analysis is suggesting that even people who do not identify or get classified as
long COVID, there's really a lot of outcomes in addition that we're seeing are an increased
incidence. And this is actually worth looking at this paper, I will say it's available nature.
There's actually a gradation, right? So non hospitalized, hospitalized admitted to the ICU,
the more severe your COVID, the higher incidence we were seeing of all these different
disorders, right? So I think that we're seeing elevation in the non hospitalized as well,
but increasing with more severity of disease. So I'm going to finish up on that note. And we
are switching when this drops, it will be May 1st. Thank you, everyone who supported the
market side of tropical medicine and hygiene. We are now going to support foundation,
international medical relief of children. Again, this is going to be a three month campaign.
To be honest, they're struggling, right? This is an organization that is supported
through volunteers, younger individuals, excited about global health, signing up,
contributing, going to all these parts of the world. They need our help. They need your help.
So take a moment, go to parasites without borders.com and help us support that. We're
going to do the same thing we've done before. We're going to double those donations. We're
going to try to get up to $40,000 to support femuric. And we're going to do this over the
next three months. So help us. Time for some email for Daniel. If you want to send one,
Daniel at microbe.tv. Sarah in Tallahassee writes, are the monoclonal antibody therapies
appropriate for patients who have already been vaccinated? So that's a great question. We are
certainly giving monoclonals to people that have already been vaccinated, or I should word it.
We are not restricting them. We are not taking a person who's vaccinated, not allowing them to
have the monoclonals. And there's a couple of reasons here. One, if you think about it,
there's usually something going on when a person has a breakthrough infection. And we've certainly
seen people that get vaccinated, and then they go ahead and they get exposed. It's really sort of
straightforward if they just got the vaccine. But we're seeing people that might be weeks out.
Some people, particularly our older members of our society, people with certain immune issues,
they may not have the ability to develop that robust immune system. We're going ahead. We're
seeing good experiences as we get more numbers. I think we actually closed one of my studies. So
hopefully we'll be getting some data out there showing demonstrating what's the efficacy in
different populations, including this particular population. All right, we have a letter from Mike,
who is an infectious disease physician in Tacoma. In your most recent clinical update, 747,
you mentioned in your reply to the retired health and safety professional listeners question,
as to why authorities are not recommending N95 respirators to the public, that you would
recommend such masks in certain high risk situations or high risk environments. You then
relayed your own story of how you recommended to your family members to wear KN95 masks when
they flew on an airplane. The listener mentioned that he thought the KN95 Chinese masks available
to him locally were likely made of similar materials and of similar quality to the 3M
N95s. When they first came out, I was initially confused by the different KN95 designation on
the respirators that were advertised from overseas and have been following the US government's evaluation
of these masks since the time. Unfortunately, such US government testing has revealed that the
overseas KN95 testing standards for such overseas masks have not been rigorously quality control.
Many did not reliably come close to 95% filtration efficiency, and Mike provides a CDC link to
a report on these masks. Thus, in the interest of being fully transparent to the listener
who wrote in and to the public, I would suggest that KN95 respirators may provide you with more
protection against SARS-CoV-2 than a cloth smath, but are overall not as quality controlled and
would suggest the listener and public consult the above web link for more information.
That is excellent. So thank you so much. I always like to point out that this is not really a one-man
show, and stuff like this is super helpful. I'm starting to feel like should I have shared one of
my KN95s or two of them with my daughter and my wife, but this is really well taken. I think that
as we go forward, I'm actually surprised at this point that we don't have better certification.
You get a mask and it's got a certain stamp or a certain... We have certifications for organic
foods where the certifications to help us with masks, which actually are keeping us safe and
saving lives. Excellent point, everyone. I'm glad that this was sent in.
We have an email from Vincent, who is also a physician. Two questions. I recently immunized a
49-year-old lady who has a history of Parkinson's and an active left septic bursitis with J&J.
Should I have left held off due to her bursitis? Or was I right in doing so? Let's take that one
first, Daniel. So you did the right thing. Never missed an opportunity to immunize that.
I'm hoping you didn't put the immunization in that bursa, right? Maybe you did the other arm that
would make a lot of sense. I got a question earlier today and actually it was about every
so often we see people. We've got people doing vaccines that maybe have never done them before
and they're somehow they get it in the bursa, which is actually usually a challenge, right?
Because we're trying to learn to do that for other reasons. But try not to get it in the bursa.
Do the other side if someone has bursitis. If they get it in the bursa,
probably we're still going to get the protection. I think it would make sense that you will.
But no, I don't think something like a bursitis. We really have to be careful not let little
things keep us from getting a person vaccinated. So I think you did the right thing. Now,
hopefully I laid out the risks with J&J really small.
Yeah, and then his next question is about J&J. Is it stand to reason to treat with aspirin prophylactically
or just wait it out? Yeah, and I've actually had this conversation with a lot of clinicians.
So it really is excellent. It's a good question. If you start doing the risk benefit,
and this was interesting, right? I started asking people, so what if you tell someone to take an
aspirin every day? 1% of those people will have a GI bleed within the year, right? We didn't pull
aspirin off the market when that happened. You are better off doing nothing. First, do no harm.
You are more likely to cause problems to someone after a J&J than you're going to
provide any help by throwing aspirin or anything at them. So go ahead, get them vaccinated. And
then if they have a severe headache, that one in a million will pick it up, we'll treat them
properly. All right, one more from Chris in your recent clinical update. You said
responsible summer camps should be doing testing because there's funding for it now. I'm on the
board of a summer camp. This is good news, but I can't find any information. Can you please
point to more information about this? Okay, I'm going to actually, I'm going to say this slowly
because we'll be giving this person a bunch of emails, hopefully. I've been working with a woman
Phoebe for about the last year, helping promote access to coordination for particularly rapid
testing, but testing in general as a solution. And so Phoebe has worked with rapid testing.org,
also worked with a lot of different foundations, and actually did a lot to push for funding in
these bills. So I can give her a little credit for that. Now I asked Phoebe previously, and she
said yes that I could share when people had questions like this. So her email is P-O-L-H-A-V-A
at gmail.com. If you're a summer camp, if you're looking for ways to get access to testing,
shoot her an email. She's not in this to make any money. I think she must make money as a
radiologist or something. She's just there to help doing all these efforts pro bono. So
reach out. Let's make sure that that money actually is spent, that that testing keeps our kids safe.
That's COVID-19 clinical update number 60 with Dr. Daniel Griffin. Thank you, Daniel.
Oh, thank you so much. And everyone, be safe.
