This week in virology, the podcast about viruses, the kind that make you sick.
From Microbe TV, this is Twiv, this week in virology, episode 752 recorded on May 6th, 2021.
I'm Vincent Draconiello, and you're listening to the podcast All About Viruses. Joining me
today from New York, Daniel Griffin. Hello, everyone. This is clinical update number 61, Daniel,
and I am going to paraphrase former New York mayor Ed Koch. How are we doing?
You know, I actually, I knew Ed Koch quite well. My father actually worked for Ed Koch, so he would
often, you know, the mornings would often start with Ed Koch swinging by the apartment.
And so, yeah, he was quite a guy. He was a bit of a character. And we will get right into the
update on how things are, but let me start with my quotation. Three things shine before the world
and cannot be hidden. They are the moon, the sun, and the truth. And now this is a modernization
of a saying attributed to the Buddha. And I think the eyes of the world are on India right now,
and it's painful to so quickly see that Hegel was correct. And the one thing we learned from
history, right, is that we do not learn from history. This is recent history, and so many of
the same mistakes are being made there. So many resources are being ported to unproven therapies,
shortages of things that do really make a difference, vaccines, oxygen, no significant access if any
at all to monoclonal therapy and use of failed non-pharmaceutical interventions. And we're going
to talk a little bit about what is a non-pharmaceutical intervention? What is an NPI? But let me start
with an update a little bit here in the US, and then we will make sure we keep mentioning what's
going on in the world, because it's quite different. One of the first things I've noticed is that the
paywalls are starting to go back up. So some of these articles that I don't know if you've noticed
that as well, but some of these articles I wanted to read, I had to go through the Columbia
access to get the article. So I think that's unfortunate. I think people were getting used to
the ability to access information. I think it's critical. Maybe we should start trying to think
about ways to keep those paywalls down, create other ways where people can get access to information.
When you publish something, you can pay a – and it is – a hefty sum to create an open access,
but we need other ways to do that. So a little bit of a change there. We are seeing a dramatic
drop in numbers of cases here in the New York area and actually across the country. I'll get
into this in a little bit later as we talk about modeling. And the prediction that I think we're
on course for an incredibly low number of cases come this July. The rest of the world,
if you look at it, they're on the other trajectory. I think they're going to start thinking of that
first what people call the wave as nothing more than a swell before the true wave started to spread
around the world. And this is tragic. But let's hit each section. So we've got a lot to cover
today. Children and COVID, I'm going to return to this in our vaccination section. I talked a
little bit last time about the CDC camp guidance. And oh my, the CDC is getting raked over the
coals on that. This episode drops on Saturday, but I'm going to be on the Brian Lair show on Friday
here on NPR that'll probably be recorded. We'll see how well I feel the questions and criticisms
of the guidance live on the year. But then I'm also going to be talking on Tuesday of next week
on TV about what we are hoping the day. I'm going to predict the future again here. So next Tuesday
we think that the EUA will expand for Pfizer down to 12 year old. And we'll discuss a little bit
about what that means. So let's go right into pre-exposure period transmission. And I think this
gets back to our initial quotation. We have learned a significant amount regarding transmission. And
this is honestly no longer an area clouded in mystery or really just upward debate. We have science
here, not just opinion. And to just quote the CDC and the WHO is in the same line with this.
COVID-19 mostly most commonly spreads during close contact. COVID-19 can sometimes be spread
by airborne transmission. COVID-19 spreads less commonly through contact with contaminated surfaces.
So in the MMWR there was an article modeling of future COVID-19 cases, hospitalization and deaths
by vaccination rates, and non-pharmaceutical intervention scenarios United States April through
September 2021. And this article is doing what Yogi Barrett told us was the hardest thing to do,
what is the hardest thing to predict the future. And that's actually what they were doing here.
The authors presented predictive models of numbers of cases, hospitalizations and deaths per week
based upon different vaccination rates. So either a high or a low vaccination rate and
different non-pharmaceutical intervention levels or what they call NPIs. So NPIs are things like
wearing masks, physical distancing. I like that they're not saying social but physical distancing.
And this was just released May 5th, but these models started their predictions March 27th.
You actually got to see a little bit like how have they been doing since the models fired up.
And they had numbers dropping from the peak in January to a nadir in April. And then a bit of
a rise into May followed by a rather rapid decline to very low levels by July. There were some
error bars in these predictions. And there were really sort of four scenario lines that you could
follow. So you could either have low or high vaccination rates coupled with low or moderate
NPIs, non-pharmaceutical interventions. And yet each of those four scenarios low, low, low,
high, high, low, high. And if anything, I have to say the future has turned out to be even better
here in the US than they predicted. If you look at the daily deaths, this has been decreasing
since that peak in January. So I know there were some sort of, we'll call them pessimists talking
about the spring wave. The spring wave has not really materialized. I've been describing it as
this spring plateau. If you look at numbers across the country, certainly regional areas,
you look at Michigan, there was a second wave in Michigan, just in terms of cases and deaths.
But if you look across the country, we are actually experiencing, I will say, their best case scenario.
And based upon this, we're actually looking at a really good July ahead of us, as I think a lot
of us have been predicting for a while here. So this is the time for masks distancing outdoors
versus indoors, limiting group sizes, all these non-pharmaceutical interventions, as we call them,
and vaccination, both active. And one day we're hoping you get approval for passive, or I'll say
expansion of the EUA for the use of the passive monoclonal antibodies. All right, let's move right
into testing, never miss an opportunity to test. We're falling down a little bit, you know,
compare our testing rates to the UK, and they are doing much better. They are doing a lot more tests
per population than we are. Now, for a while, we've been talking about the way different tests
can be used to answer different questions about COVID. And a big disconnect still seems to come
in people's understanding of the rapid antigen test versus PCR testing. So the paper performance
evaluation of Serial SARS-CoV-2, rapid antigen testing during a nursing home outbreak,
was recently published in the Annals of Internal Medicine. The authors reported on a prospective
evaluation involving three facility-wide rounds of testing, where paired respiratory specimens
were collected to evaluate the performance of the BINEX now, antigen test, compared with virus culture
and real-time PCR. So real-time reverse transcription, polymerase chain reaction.
Early and late infection were defined using changes in the RT-PCR cycle threshold values
and prior test results. And they evaluated 532 paired specimens collected from 234 residents
and staff. And the authors reported on the percentage of positive agreements, a little bit of terminology,
the PPA, and the percentage of negative agreements, so the PNA, of the BINEX now rapid testing and
the RT-PCR with viral culture. They're using viral culture here as really a potential infectiousness
measure. Now, what did they find? What about sensitivity for detecting infectious level
of SARS-CoV-2? So the BINEX now, PPA, so the percentage of positive agreement with viral culture,
used for detection of replication, competent virus, was 95%. I think that's pretty stellar,
right? So you're really asking the question, is this person contagious? However, the overall PPA
with RT-PCR of antigen tests with RT-PCR was only 69%. So I think this is consistent with what
we have been seeing, which is that PCR is perhaps overly sensitive for asking and answering the
question of infectiousness. The RT-PCR is great late in the course for picking up those people,
past that acute first week, who might now be in that early inflammatory phase. They might be showing
up at the hospital. The rapid antigen test at this point may start to turn negative,
but we're asking a different question. We're saying, is this need for oxygen
due to an acute infection last week? And so the negative antigen tests that they did,
where there was a negative antigen test and a positive PCR, those had a mean CT value of 33.2.
So an RNA copy numbered down only in the thousand. So I think this really reinforces this model.
The rapid antigen tests within 15 minutes is really good at identifying those people who are
contagious or infectious, getting them isolated before they spread. PCR is more sensitive, but it
asks and answers a different question. So don't think of the PCR as first class and the antigen test
is sitting back in coach by the bathroom. The rapid antigen test is a very sensitive,
really helpful tool for blocking spread of this virus. Active vaccination never
miss an opportunity to vaccinate. In the US, we have shifted from arm searching for vaccines to
vaccine searching farms. And we're definitely seeing that we need to do a little better job
here of connecting those arms with vaccines. And now this might change for a brief time,
because I am hoping that prior to the next wave that we record, we hear that the FDA,
like the EU and Canada, will have expanded the Pfizer EOA down to 12 year olds. So 12, 13,
14, 15, we're expecting they will become eligible. We're already hearing that the states are getting
ready there. They're expecting this as well. They want to be ready so that that morning,
it's usually six a.m. Right? We got up at six a.m. So we can say that they hear that it's
expanded, that the states can then say, okay, we're on board with this. And all the pharmacies,
all the state sites can be ready to get that Pfizer into people's arms. Because I have to say,
a lot of Pfizer vaccine is sitting there. We also heard, this is exciting news, that
buy-in tech, right? So it's the Pfizer buy-in tech vaccine. So buy-in tech has a new formulation
that should allow them to store the vaccine for up to six months in a normal refrigerator.
And they're preparing the data packets for FDA approval on this upgrade to the vaccine.
And this will be a huge shift past these thermal shippers with dry ice and all those concerns.
Now, what about when we're going to vaccinate kids? Are the kids going to want to get vaccinated?
Are the parents going to want to vaccinate them? I was talking a little bit with Jay Burger,
the head of Pediatrics for Pro Health New York. And I will mention also an avid
Twiv listener about a lot of the conversations he's had with parents about why they would want
to protect their children from COVID-19 with vaccination. And there still is this perception
that children do not get sick with COVID, or that children do not end up in the hospital with COVID,
or that children are not at risk for long-term impacts following a COVID infection.
So I just wanted to take a moment here and just sort of get the numbers out here,
because this will be a discussion, I think, a lot of physicians, actually a lot of family
members will have with other family members. On May 2, the American Academy of Pediatrics
reported that for the last week of April, the percentage of cases occurring in children
had risen to 22% of the reported cases, or up to 71,649 cases in children under the age of 18,
just in the last week of April. Now, I have to say, last year during April, children only made up
3% of all the cases of COVID-19 in the entire country. And actually, there were less overall
cases. So this is really a dramatic rise in the number of children that got infected that last
week of April. This is really a dramatic rise in the number of children who are currently getting
infected with COVID. And I have to say, kudos to the parents out there. We really did a very
effective job early on of protecting our kids from getting COVID. This involves school closures,
and all the other things we did. But now we're letting the kids get COVID.
But I want to say, even doing so much to protect the kids here in the United States,
we still had pediatric deaths. We still had hospitalizations. We still have children that
developed long COVID, as I've previously mentioned. And this is one of those public health scenarios.
When you do a really good job, and the outcomes are good, and I will say only a couple hundred
children die, people say, oh, it really doesn't affect children. It must not be a big thing.
That's the problem with a public health success, which we have had to date for children.
But if we look down what's going on in Brazil, right, we've already had thousands of deaths in
children down there, where they are not protecting the kids, over a thousand deaths in babies.
And Brazil is not the size of the US. So just use that as a measure of what happens if you
don't protect the children like we really did here. Now, let's go into another article on this
area. So in JAMA, we saw anybody response to two dose SARS-CoV-2 mRNA vaccine series in
solid organ transplant recipients. This is a little bit of a downer, to be honest.
The authors looked at transplant recipients, right? So there's a question we know in the studies,
only certain people were vaccinated, certain people were excluded. So can the vaccine
protect everyone? Can it protect this particularly vulnerable part of the population?
And so the authors looked at transplant recipients without prior PCR confirmed COVID-19
and they recruited from across the US to participate in this was a prospective cohort study.
They looked at those who completed the two dose SARS-CoV-2 mRNA vaccine series
between December 16, 2020, right? And March 13, 2021. And they followed them up through April
13, 2021. And they were checking a semi-quantitative anti-spike. So looking at seeing what percent of
these folks responded. And the proportion of patients who developed a positive antibody test
after the first dose was only 15%. So they're looking at 658 patients, only 15% of them had a
measurable antibody level after the first dose. And if they checked after the second,
it was only 54%. So only about half of them had a measurable antibody level after the second dose.
We don't know what sort of a level of antibody might be a correlate of immunity.
So caveat here, but the level of antibody that these people were getting, those 54% who even
did test positive was below that of the general population. Now, many of the 12 listeners are
pretty sophisticated, right? So they want to know what about the T cells? We're not seeing T cell
data in this publication. And unfortunately, the studies of T cell responses are even less
encouraging. So we're concerned about these individuals. There's questions about, could we
give them a third dose? Maybe we can somehow get that up. Maybe. And some people have probably
seen ideas that you combine in mRNA with an antiviral vector. Maybe you can sort of get
different augmentation of different parts of the immune system. And that can somehow help these
people. But right now, this is potentially that group of people that the EUA expansion of the
monoclonal might benefit. If you can't make your own antibodies, maybe we can give you those protective
antibodies. So we will see potential expansion into this population in the future.
All right. Remember post exposure, a test does not predict the future. There still is that
two to 14 day incubation period. But then you go into that next stage, should you get infected,
the period of detectable viral replication or the viral symptom phase? Remember, this is the time
for monitoring and monoclonals. And I actually should say, and for education, I will tell a little
bit, well, a couple of stories here about how this is not going as well as I would like it to be
going. So there is an issue with underutilization of monoclonals. So I'm going to share a couple
stories here. But the main one that I'm going to start with is a patient of mine that I mentioned
before. This was that gentleman in his 50s who was diagnosed with his wife. So the two of them
went to an urgent care. They weren't feeling well. This was not a pro health urgent care.
The they were diagnosed with with COVID. They both met criteria for access to monoclonals.
They were offered therapy. So things going well so far. The wife said, yes, that she wanted to go
ahead. 36 hours later, she felt great, right? Got to know her a lot because she was face timing
with the husband. The husband did not do well. The husband felt like he would be just fine and
wanted to take his chances. The urgent care physician did not maybe advise him strongly enough.
He went on to get quite ill, ended up in the hospital, steroids, toe salismab, oxygen,
eventually mechanical ventilation. And this Monday, this gentleman in his 50s died leaving
behind his widow and his children. I mean, I have to say, like if this man came into a medical setting
and he had bacteria in his blood, if he had chest crushing chest pain, we were worried about heart
attack. I'm not sure the urgent care physician or any clinician would be as willing to just sort of
let him go take his chances. I think we really have to appreciate, you know, what an incredible
impact the monoclonal therapy can have on these individuals. And they're sitting on shelves,
right? You know, it's a phone call away. We need to make sure this happens. I just had another
gentleman I admitted today. This gentleman had a BMI of about 40. He went to some urgent care I had
never heard of before, because he felt crummy and wanted to get tested. When he did get a positive
test, initially it was a rapid, they said it was positive. They sent off a PCR. They called him.
They said, your test is positive. He said, Oh, can I come in? I'd like to talk to someone,
find out what to do. They said, Oh, I'm sorry. We don't see positive COVID patients in our
facility. We're worried about the risk of infection. He asked what he was supposed to do. They said,
remember that piece of paper you received? You should read that isolate for 10 days.
He is now he got admitted today on oxygen. He's in the hospital. Again, this is something that
could have been prevented with just a phone call, just a little effort early inflammatory phase.
So now this is that second week. This is for those folks who didn't get monoclonals or weren't
eligible. If room air saturations are less than 94%, that's when we have data that steroids,
six milligrams by mouth, one time a day, times 10 days, you can do IV, but you don't necessarily
need to, but people can just take that pill. This is associated with not only improved outcomes,
but a mortality reduction. This can actually sometimes result in rapid enough improvement
that that person's setting 92, 93 might come back up, might not drop into the 80s, might not
require hospitalization. This is also that period of time when we use that remdesivir,
$3,000 for a five day course, minor impacts. But as I've mentioned, huge expense and no compelling
data on mortality, right? So hear about tons of remdesivir being used in India. Remember,
that's a $3,000 a course medicine. And let's talk a little bit here in a minute about some
alternatives. Anticoagulation for our hospitalized patients improves outcomes and has a mortality
benefit. So the ash guideline panel suggests using prophylactic intensity over intermediate
intensity or therapeutic intensity, anticoagulation in patients with COVID-19 related critical illness
who do not have suspected or confirmed VTE, right? If they've got a clot, it's straightforward. If
they don't, you want to get everyone on anticoagulation. But then they go ahead. And I think that this
is really important. An individual's assessment of the patient's risk of thrombosis and bleeding
is important when deciding on anticoagulation intensity. The panel acknowledges that higher
intensity anticoagulation may be preferred in patients judged to be at high thrombotic risk.
And low bleeding risk. And that might be where we're saying some of this new data we're waiting
for peer review may suggest floor patients on full dose and ICU patients on low dose. But of
course, individualized, keep up with the latest data and look at your patient and make that decision.
This should be made by the treating clinician, not by some institutional algorithm. And we perhaps
do not give as much appreciation as we should that supplemental oxygen is critical. I was talking
to some of my colleagues today in the ICU about that. If a patient starts dropping those oxygen
saturations into the 80s, we definitely want to look at getting them on oxygen. Oxygen saves life.
And we're seeing in India right now what happens if you do not have enough supply of oxygen. And
our listeners might remember how close we got last winter in some of the New York hospitals
and all the upgrades that the hospitals put in place over the summer to allow us to have high
flow oxygen this winter. If we didn't have those upgrades, we would be like, we would have been
like India a little while back to deliver the high flow oxygen that we did that kept so many
people off ventilators. We did not have that infrastructure in place. And we sort of tipped
my hat to the hospital administrators that made the decision to invest that money, right? It was
a great return on that as far as money goes, but a great return on that as far as patient care.
Other pulmonary support measures such as proning have a proven mortality benefit,
but they actually require the providers, particularly the nurses to be involved.
If you just ask a patient and struck them to lay on their belly to turn on their side,
they usually don't want to. When you're having trouble breathing, that's not what you want to do.
So this actually is, I'm going to say, a person-intensive intervention. I can stop by the room. I could
talk to the patient, explain how important it is. But this is the nurses telling them over and over.
The medical assistants, you got to switch position. You got to do this. You got to do that.
This is associated with better outcomes. I want to remind our listeners, right?
Antibiotics are not helpful for treating viral infections and particularly combinations of
renal or kidney toxic medications such as vancomycin, piprosilentesobactam. These can be harmful in a
disease process already associated with a high risk of kidney failure, progression to dialysis
or death. You are not helping your potentially harming your patients. It's not safer to put
them on these renal toxic antibiotics just in case. Now, what about adding tosyllism app to
patients already receiving all these interventions, including steroids? So we have some updates. We
have some new data here. After the randomized embedded multi-factorial adaptive platform
trial for community acquired pneumonia, which is called remap cap study, we saw a survival
benefit in critically ill patients with the use of tosyllism app. And after this, a number of the
hospital systems, they stopped blocking its use and they started to allow its use, but they were
using a very restrictive algorithm. Only allow certain patients who met a rigid set of criteria
oversight by a specific approval person, not even necessarily involved directly in the patient care.
Other hospital systems, really just much like restricted antibiotics,
ask that a specialist be involved in the case and make that decision. Well, the peer reviewed
results of the recovery trial have finally been published. And the recovery trial was looking
at the impact of tosyllism app in a broader hospitalized population. This was published in
the Lancet. Tosyllism app in patients admitted to hospital with COVID-19 recovery, a randomized
controlled open label platform trial. So as sort of this title says, right, let's get it all in the
title, this was a randomized controlled open label platform trial. So basically the people
that treating clinicians knew whether the person was getting tosyllism app or not,
randomized evaluation of COVID-19 therapy recovery, assessing several possible treatments in the UK.
Now, this was looking at tosyllism app, what we see published here. And the trial participants
with hypoxia, right? So oxygen saturations here, they're using less than 92% evidence of systemic
inflammation. So they're using C-reactive protein greater than or equal to 75 milligrams per liter,
we're eligible for enrollment in this random assignment in a one-to-one ratio to either the
usual standard of care that we've discussed, right? This is going to be anticoagulation, oxygen,
steroids, either plus tosyllism app at a weight-based adjustment. So 400 milligrams to 800 milligrams,
depending on weight given intravenously or not. And a second dose could be given 12 to 24 hours
later if it was felt that the patient's condition had not improved. And the primary outcome was 28
day mortality. So I just want to point out, these are not just ICU patients. These are floor patients
who are requiring oxygen. This is not people not on oxygen. The people say it's about half of the
patients admitted to hospital in the UK would be eligible as per this criteria. So 4,116 adults
were included in the assessment of tosyllism app, including the majority, I'll say, receiving
systemic corticosteroids, as mentioned. Overall, 31% of the patients allocated to tosyllism app
and 35% of the patients allocated to usual care died within 28 days, right? So that was about a
15% reduction in mortality with the addition of tosyllism app to standard of care. Consistent
results were seen in all the pre-specified subgroups of patients, including those, the
majority receiving systemic corticosteroids. Patients allocated to tosyllism app were more
likely to be discharged from the hospital within 28 days, 57% versus 50%. Among those not receiving
invasive mechanical ventilation at baseline, patients allocated tosyllism app were less likely
to reach the composite endpoint of invasive mechanical ventilation or death, 35% versus 42%,
so that was a risk ratio of 0.84. Just to sort of put this all together, right? This is extending
the use of tosyllism app beyond just those critically ill patients. Tosyllism app was associated with
a 15% reduction in death, looking at all the patients and a 16% reduction in the composite
endpoint of mechanical ventilation or death in those not receiving mechanical ventilation at
baseline. They reported only three serious adverse events, which all resolved with standard treatment,
right? So those were three infections. I like to point out that we can treat infections,
but we cannot treat death. When they did an analysis of all the trials today, so there's nine trials
to date, they concluded that if you did a meta-analysis basically, including this trial,
tosyllism app is associated with a significant 14% reduction in 28-day mortality. So I'm hoping
that this trial will do for tosyllism app what the original recovery trial on steroids did for
steroids and more patients will have access to this life-saving therapy. Now they also have a
pre-planned six-month analysis, so we're also going to find out about the long-term outcomes
of these patients. Are we seeing less long COVID? Are we seeing less pulmonary complications,
less neurological complications? So that is pre-planned. We're not going to see that for a number
of months, but we're going to hopefully have that date as we go into the fall of 2021.
Now, what about limitations, right? The study was open-label. It was not blinded placebo
that sort of trial, so the participants and the local staff knew who was getting what treatment.
Among the 1837 patients assigned to tosyllism app, not all of them actually got the drug,
only 84% actually received the drug, so we're sort of an intent to treat analysis here,
so the reported results may actually underestimate the true benefit of tosyllism app in reducing
death. And then given that patients with COVID-19 often have a prolonged hospital course and may
continue to have issues post discharge, 28 days, as mentioned, is not enough. So we're looking
forward to the six-month analysis. What's the long-term outcome with tosyllism app versus not
getting tosyllism app? I'm going to quote the comment in the issue of the Lancet by Shrupti
Gupta and David E. Leif in summary, the recovery trial provides the most definitive evidence thus
far to address the controversy over whether tosyllism app should be added to our armamentarium of
treatments for severely ill patients with COVID-19. The answer is yes. And I certainly want to make
a comment right here on the equity impact, right? Just like monoclonals, this is not an inexpensive
off-the-shelf pennies-adose treatment. But let's look at this, as I think I mentioned before,
remdesivir at $3,000 a course with not really impressive benefit. No compelling mortality benefit
is being used like water over in India. This is a therapy that though the hospitals may charge
thousands of dollars for can be acquired for hundreds of dollars per dose. It's a single dose.
It's not five days. This is something we should be looking at as far as equity and getting this
out to individuals. All right, so I have gone long enough today. I want to finish by reminding
people of our fundraiser. So we are now helping support FIMREC Foundation International Medical
Relief of Children. And as mentioned, this is an organization that had been funded primarily
through young, excited individuals ready to go out there and save the world, ready to volunteer
in all these many parts of the world. And because of the pandemic, that has really been
interrupted. We know, right? Not a lot of young individuals are able to go to these places to
volunteer. That source of support for these clinics has dried up. FIMREC needs your help,
needs our help. So please go to parasiteswithoutborders.com. We are going to try to double your money
to get up to $40,000 to support FIMREC and really the tremendous work that they do throughout the
world. So thank you everyone so far and continue to help us. Time for a few emails for Daniel.
If you want to send one, it's Daniel at micro TV. The first is from an anonymous listener who writes,
My father was recently diagnosed with plasma blastic lymphoma. He received his first dose of
Moderna three weeks before his diagnosis. I know that some people have had a lymphatic
response due to the vaccine. My father's hematologist doesn't think the vaccine caused the lymphoma,
but mentioned it may have caused it to increase the lymphoma's fast growth. Have a couple of
questions. First, how likely do you think my father's hematologist is correct in his belief
that the vaccine may have sped the progression of the lymphoma? Let's take that one first.
Yeah, so I'm going to say, I don't think he's right. I'm sorry. You know, if you think about the
way B cells work and you think about it, lymphoblastic lymphoma. Now, this is going to be B cells that
are basically growing out of control. B cells have a certain specificity. So you would have to
somehow have the same antigen, like this would have to be a COVID specific, a SARS-CoV-2 specific
B cell that was expanding and forming this cancer. The coincidence there is just beyond belief.
We're talking about a one in a trillion chance that your vaccine is going to provide the antigen
that will trigger the B cell receptor of that cancer. So that does not make sense to me.
What we've seen in people get RNA vaccines is sometimes they'll get swollen lymph nodes
in the axilla, in the armpit of the area where the vaccine was given. And we've now
learned from some studies out of the UK that those individuals with the swollen lymph nodes,
these are people that had COVID before. So the vaccine can trigger the lymph nodes to enlarge
significantly if they have B cells in there that have seen the spike protein of SARS-CoV-2 before.
But I just think the one in a trillion odds here that you're happening to hit the same B cell
receptor. I don't think that's a connection there. All right. Question number two, my father didn't
get the second Moderna vaccine. He's immunocompromised because of a kidney transplant. He also has
diabetes. How much protection from COVID do you think he'll have from just one shot?
Wow. I feel like this is a planted question because it is perfect. The paper that we just
talked about really would suggest that after one dose, maybe a 15% chance I will even have any
level detective antibody. So I'm going to say at this point, it is most likely that your dad does
not have much protection. And so this is one of the situations where I would say going ahead
with that second vaccine makes sense. And this again, your dad might be a candidate down the
road here for an EUA expansion and a passive protection with monoclonal cocktail. All right.
I think you answered his remaining question. They weren't planning to give him the second dose,
but they're not sure what to do, or should he get a different vaccine?
Yeah. I mean, I'd say that's good because there's really two questions in there.
One is, as I was sort of suggesting earlier, there's been a discussion lately about trying
to combine different vaccines. We're learning about mRNA vaccines in this population.
Maybe we can get a better response with the adenoviral vaccines. Maybe we can get a better
response by sort of combining to. You definitely got to ask that question. Right now your dad is
not protected. We're in a pandemic. We would think that there's some benefit to vaccination.
If your dad gets COVID, his chance of dying is actually really high. So yeah, I understand
your hesitancy to get that second vaccine. I'm going to say that in general, this is a situation
where we usually would recommend going ahead with the second vaccine. All right. Next one is
from Barry, who says, I'd really like to hear your views on the role of budessinide and other
inhaled corticosteroids in mild COVID. The three or so articles I've reviewed seem to reflect the
favorable trend. Many of my colleagues in ambulatory and emergency medicine have prescribed or prescribed
budessinide. I'm uncharacteristically supportive as well, even though I generally stay away from
the sharp cutting edge of clinical medicine. What do you think Daniel? Yeah, you know, I have to say
right. If it was April of 2020, everyone be getting budessinide because there were a few small studies
suggesting maybe some benefit. I think we don't know. I think and I think in in May of 2021,
I think we can say we don't know. We need to study this. We need to know. And then once we know,
we'll be able to recommend. I think it's hopefully time to stop experimenting on our patients and
start providing them with science based advice and guidance. And if there's something out there
that looks interesting, we need to push and make sure it gets properly studied so we can then offer
our patients therapies that actually have proven benefit. All right, stop. Right. My question, my
52 year old boyfriend has hay fever because of pollen. He takes daily antihistamines. He got an
opportunity to vaccinate. And of course, following your number one rule received Moderna, I advised
him to stop taking the antihistamines to let his immune system be at its best. But after one day,
he felt so bad with hay fever that he continued. Was I right to antihistamines interfere with the
efficiency of the body's immune system to produce antibodies? You know, not significantly. Let's
be honest, when it did these huge trials with 10s, 30,000 people per trial on average, right?
You know, people were getting the vaccine, they would take an antihistamine, they take hyperprophen,
they take the seed of minifen. I think if anything, there's been this huge concern that our immune
system is so incredibly fragile. Our immune system is robust. We get sick all the time, right? Your
boyfriend probably fights off the common cold, pollen, antihistamines. Can you imagine that?
Some people take antihistamines while they're fighting off influenza. Antihistamines are not
going to significantly impair a person's ability to respond to a vaccine. We've been giving vaccines
for decades. This has never been an issue. There really is no compelling science. Go ahead,
take that antihistamine. Don't suffer. This has been the worst allergy season in history.
All right, one more sneak an extra one in from Pablo. Two questions. One, patient at high risk,
cerebral palsy, tracheostomy, nonverbal, whose parents are COVID positive. He was not admitted for
bacterial tracheitis. According to EUA rules, I cannot use monoclonal because he's COVID negative.
But once he becomes positive, he is going to be inpatient and likely hypoxic suggestions.
Yeah, so this is tough, right? With the current EUA, we're sort of restricted. I mean, this
this would be one of those where we have the data, like you're sort of saying,
why can't I give this person monoclonal so that they don't get COVID? So this is probably one
person we want to test maybe on a daily basis. Catch them as soon as possible. If you catch someone
in the first day or two, give them monoclonals. I think our studies have suggested that earlier,
you jump in the better. You can really avoid what here sounds like it could be a horrible outcome.
Soon, soon, fingers crossed, we're going to get that EU expansion to use this prophylactic
based on really compelling data of the Regeneron cocktail.
And patient number 200, Tuximab for autoimmune encephalitis got severe COVID pneumonia one
month after the second dose of Moderna after Remdesivir went home, came back a few days later,
CT27, no spike IgG. Is he a candidate for preventive monoclonal? Does the EUA allow it?
Yes, that's a great question. And actually, I have to say, let's go back to what we know
here, because I had a, you know, the CT of 27 is exactly what I recently was dealing with with
the patient who has a GPA, who is not able to clear the virus. The woman that I'm taking care of
actually was infected in December. Her CT value is still in the 20s, right? So what do you do here?
Up at Boston, there was a nice article where they gave convalescent plasma several times.
All they did was get the CT to go up a little bit, get the viral load a little down, and basically
breed resistant variants with convalescent plasma. So that was not helpful. We're concerned that if
you start giving someone who can't mount a good immune response, you know, the cocktail,
that you might do that as well. But this might be a little different the patient you're describing.
This is a patient who seems to have an isolated impairment of B cell function.
Maybe the T cells are still there. So this is a little bit of a gray area.
EUA would not allow access. Compassionate use might. But this is going to be a little bit tricky.
But we'll sort of see you going forward. Right now you're in the gray, the experimental area.
I am not sure, but there certainly is that risk. If you give a person who can't clear the virus
themselves, the monoclonal cocktail with persistence that you might breed a resistant variant.
But no, this is one of those. But boy, what a challenge. That is COVID-19 clinical update number
61 with Dr. Daniel Griffin. Thank you, Daniel. Oh, thank you so much. And everyone be safe.
