This week in virology, the podcast about viruses, the kind that make you sick.
From Microbe TV, this is Twiv, this week in virology, episode 755, recorded on May 13, 2021.
I'm Vincent Rackeniello, and you're listening to the podcast All About Viruses. Joining me today
from New York, Daniel Griffin. Hello, everyone. How's it going this week, Daniel?
It's mixed, right? Numbers are getting better in New York, right? We finally, the other day,
got below less than 2,000 people in hospital, which is quite, you know, imagine, at one point,
we had more than that dying per day, right? Now we're less than 2,000 in hospital.
So it's amazing the way our benchmark is changing. We're still seeing 20, 30, 40 people dying a day,
but that's not 2,000. Still had another one of my patients die last night, so we're still losing
people. Still, I mean, people die of COVID here. But I think people are seeing there's a change.
I mean, a lot of the hospitals are pointing out 99% of the people that are getting admitted
now are people that never got a vaccine. So that's what we're seeing. We're seeing people who would
rather take their chances not do well, right? This is the lottery that you lose. But let me start
off with our quotation, and then we'll go right into this. And I'm going to start with a quotation
from Nelson Mandela. There is no keener revelation of a society's soul than the way it treats its
children. So we're going to be talking actually quite a bit about children today. There's been a
lot of news about kids and masks. We'll try to hit on everything. And a lot of stuff is hot off the
press, right? So I was listening, I was listening to the latest Twiv right before this. I do listen
to all the other Twiv and Twix episodes, by the way. So there's some comment. If Daniel's listening,
I'm always listening, right? Like Dauchy on the couch or something. But let's start off with,
we won't get right to the hot news. We'll start with some background on May 6th,
Moderna reported. Phase two, three teen cove study of mRNA 1273 and adolescents.
The phase two, three study of mRNA 1273 and adolescents ages 12 to 17 completed enrollment
in the US. We got initial analysis here of 3235 participants, randomized two to one. And we're
seeing here vaccine efficacy of 96% in the zero negative participants who received at least one
injection, right? So the analysis included 12 cases starting 14 days after the first dose
and based on the CDC definition of COVID-19, which requires one COVID-19 symptom paired with a
nasopharyngeal swab or saliva sample positive for SARS-CoV-2 by RT-PCR. So just a little bit
more about this, right? Just to give this is the Moderna sort of balance to the data that
we're going to talk about with Pfizer, so we're going to talk about what Pfizer is now doing.
But in the study, the median duration for follow-up in this analysis was 35 days following the second
dose. The vaccine, the Moderna vaccine was very well tolerated in these adolescents.
Majority of the, say, adverse events were mild, moderate, no serious safety concerns. So what
are these things? Some side pain, right? It hurts to get poked with a needle. People did reconfirm
that. Fire is hot. They did also report headache, fatigue, muscle pain. There was some chills. So
the company reported that they're going to continue to collect the data here.
We can look forward to the Moderna vaccine in the future, also requesting expansion down
to cover adolescents if the rest of the data is in line with what we're seeing here.
What about kids younger? What about down to six months? There's also the kid cove study
of the Moderna vaccine in younger children. This is ongoing, and this actually is down to
six months of age. So this will cover those six months of age up to 11 years. That's ongoing.
Just to predict the future, you know, and this probably will not be Moderna first. It'll be
Pfizer, Moderna, et cetera. We're thinking we're not going to be expanding down to these younger
ages until probably September. But we'll see as we go forward with that.
Daniel, can I ask you? The numbers are very small. And we puzzled about that on Twiv.
Why are they so low for the adolescent studies?
Yeah. You know, there's a couple ways to look at this. One is we're just sort of slightly moving
moving the bar here. So normally we think of vaccine studies as being about 30,000 people,
minimum duration of two months. And so we've had now millions of people 16, 17, 18, just right
above here. So you're just sort of moving that down a little bit. And you're basically saying,
is there any sort of a different signal here? So this really builds on the 30 thought. You
couldn't do this by itself. You couldn't say, oh, I'm just going to do a, in this case, 3,235
participant study and get a vaccine licensed based on that. So it's really, this is data building
on the other data. And actually, no, that's, I'm glad you bring up because I get this question
all the time, parents say, like, but it's only like 3000 here, 2000 here, while I talk about 5,000
people in these studies so far. We're actually talking about millions of people. And we're just
moving moving that bar a little bit. You know, what is physiologically the difference between a 16
year old and a 15 year old, probably, as we're seeing not not very much, except boy,
this looks like an age when we get a really robust immune response. Is that good, Benson?
Try to see if there's more questions. Yeah, so I mean, you say millions, but the trial was,
you know, tens of thousands. So are we, are we following people who are being vaccinated in some
way? Yeah, so there's, there's two main ways that we're following people who've been vaccinated,
right? And I think Pfizer actually is the vaccine that has the most doses out there. Well, over 100
million here in the US alone. And there's two ways we follow that. So one is the VAERS, which is
sort of a passive anyone can report. But there's also active, we call phase four, where we continue
to follow a large cohort of these people who've been vaccinated. So it's a combination. The VAERS
is the broadest, right? And as we saw, even something as rare as with the clotting with JJ,
something that, you know, is maybe one in a million or so, maybe one in 100,000, we can pick that up.
So we have actually a tremendous amount of safety data in, you know, in the age group just right
above 15. So 16, 17, 18. Okay, great. Thank you. Transmission. You know, as I like to say,
COVID-19, most commonly spreads during close contact. COVID-19 can sometimes be spread by
airborne transmission. People seem very excited that that's been added. CD COVID-19 spreads less
commonly through contact with contaminated surfaces, right? And that was where it said maybe one in
every 10,000 case is due to contact. So we've really moved a lot away from the hygiene theater.
So this last week, I have to say the whole outdoor transmission topic heated up. This is a moving
target. And many are actually taking issue. I'm going to say appropriately. So with this number
that's being bandied about of less than 10%. Now, now, I for a while have quoted that your risk
of getting COVID outdoors versus indoor is about 20 times less likely outdoors, right? So when
that put us more down around less than 5%. Now, I want to say there isn't necessarily new science
here that everyone's getting sort of excited about. It's really rather a reaction to the updated CDC
camp guidance where masking outdoors is recommended as a baseline with certain exceptions. And we
talked about this CDC guidance that was updated by the CDC on April 24th. And what did they say?
What got sort of a strong reaction is they said all people in camp facilities should wear masks
at all times with exceptions. All right. So what are those exceptions? And we talked about this.
It could be the exceptions could be certain people or certain settings or activities.
Certain people, they said, children to and younger, a person with a disability who cannot safely
wear or remove a mask if necessary. Anyone who has trouble breathing is unconscious, right? So we're
we're saying certain people are exempted from this, but also certain settings and activities,
right? And so what are those? Eating, drinking, swimming, napping involved in activities that
could make your mask wet during high intensity activities where a mask would create difficulties
breathing. And now add to this vaccinated, right? So that that's going to bring us back to outdoor
transmission. But before we jump into that, breaking news, right here on Twiv. I don't know if you
heard this, Vincent, but today, Dr. Wilensky at the CDC announced in Thursday the day that we're
recording this episode that people fully vaccinated against COVID-19 do not need to wear masks or
practice social distancing indoors or outdoors, except under certain circumstances.
This was then echoed by Anthony Fauci. Now, there certainly are special considerations
if a person cannot mount an effective immune response to the vaccine. I was meeting with a
gentleman on Tuesday, 89 years old. He has an immunodeficiency where he has to get
intravenous immunoglobulins on a regular basis. He has some ongoing viral issues. Yeah, that's
not a man who's going to go to the ball game with his mask off or be in a large indoor setting
with his mask off. So this is certainly great news for people that have a healthy immune system,
people who can mount a proper response to the vaccines. I think that this is reasonable.
I think it's responsible. I think the science is now here and clear on just how incredible
protection a person gets when they're vaccinated. And I think this is going to challenge some of
the comments and concerns about quote unquote herd immunity or community immunity.
If you're vaccinated, right, we learn things that masks reduce risk by 80%. Maybe being outdoors
reduces risk by 95%. Your risk of ending up in the hospital or dying of COVID is reduced even more
most dramatically by vaccination. And I think that the science is now here. And I think as people,
you know, beat up the CDC a little, the CDC gives us evidence-based, reliable guidance.
And we've been thinking the science has been mounting. It's finally here and the CDC did not
wait and they stepped forward and endorsed these recommendations. But let's get back to outdoor
transmission. You know, as I said, this is not something new, but let's go through what the data
is when we hear this less than 10%. So back in November, there was a systematic review
published in the Journal of Infectious Diseases, outdoor transmission of SARS-CoV-2 and other
respiratory viruses, a systematic review. So these authors conducted a systematic review
of peer-reviewed papers indexed in PubMed, M-based and Web of Science, and freeprints
in Europe PMC through 12 August 2020 that described cases of human transmission of SARS-CoV-2.
Reports of other respiratory virus transmission were included for reference. Now,
I think it's getting nice when I listen to the other twibs that were getting back to
peer-reviewed literature. So hopefully in the future, all of these analysis will only include
peer-reviewed, properly-fetted research. But the authors here reported that based on five
identified studies, they found a low proportion of SARS-CoV-2 infections occurred outdoors. And
they say less than 10%. And then here's where you get that number. The odds of indoor transmission
were very high compared to outdoors 18.7 times, right? And they give a confidence interval to that.
So that's that I say 20, and I'm rounding 18.7 up to 20. Now, I will say, though, if you don't
just read the results, but if you actually go through this whole article, and this will be posted,
I think on parasites without borders so that you can actually do this and start looking at the
tables, you'll actually see there's two really large studies in this analysis. One that involved
10,926 cases and another that involved 7,322. And in those two large studies, the number was
actually less than 1%. So it is true that the risk is less than 10%, but based on the two
large studies that were included, it was less than one. Now, there was a small study with 103
work-related cases. In that study, they suggested maybe 5%. So I think it's important to look through
the data here. Yes, it is less than 10%. It may actually be less than 1%. So if you're outdoors,
you've probably reduced your risk by at least 95%. People get vaccinated as we're seeing really
goes down even farther. And that's what we're hearing from the CDC. So effective is vaccination
that it is even more effective than wearing a mask and being outdoors and protecting you.
So I think the evidence is really compelling that being vaccinated and outdoors without masks
is really low risk all around. And as the CDC is saying, boy, if you're vaccinated,
maybe being indoors is fine too. Now that vaccine eligibility has dropped to age 12,
this is really going to leave us a small donut hole for the summer going into this, right? The
kids age three to 11, you combine testing, drops in community prevalence, all the many exceptions
that are sort of built into when the masks can come off. I think we're really headed in a positive
direction here testing. Never miss an opportunity to test. There's been a little discussion,
and we're seeing it in our urgent care and primary care centers. People are embracing those tests
at home. I wish the price point was better. I mean, it would be wonderful if there was some way of,
you know, instead of these wide ranges that you're seeing, you know, if they were a dollar a test.
They look like they're about 1250 a test. Some people are charging 35 a test. I guess if you buy
them in bulk at 1000 at a time, you can get that, you know, lower price point. But we're actually
getting, you know, parents are now doing this at home. Their child wakes up, doesn't feel well.
They wake up, don't feel well. They do the test. Sometimes that test is positive. They come in for
advice for guidance. So I just think the access to tests is fantastic. But boy, get vaccinated,
and then you won't have to worry quite as much. All right, active vaccination. Never miss an
opportunity to vaccinate. This is the big news that I think everyone's waiting for. This week was
the FDA expansion of the EUA for Pfizer down to age 12. On Monday evening, May 10th, 6 p.m.
The FDA announced that they had expanded the emergency use authorization for the Pfizer
BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine for the prevention of coronavirus disease 2019 COVID-19 caused by severe
acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus to SARS-CoV-2 to include adolescents 12 through 15 years of age.
I was very happy about the timing because I was going to peer on TV. I did appear on TV the
following morning at Tuesday AM, and I was going to discuss this expansion. So it was really good
timing that they squeezed that in there for me. Now, what did the FDA have to say about this decision?
And they actually said, so March 2020, March 1st, 2020 through April 30, 2021, approximately 1.5
million COVID-19 cases in individuals 11 to 17 years of age had been reported to the Centers for
Disease Control. The FDA has determined that Pfizer BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine has met the
statutory criteria to amend the EUA and that the known and potential benefits of this vaccine
in individuals 12 years of age and older outweigh the known and potential risks supporting the
vaccine's use in this population. So we discussed the data on a prior TWIV. We discussed some data
today on Moderna, but in the past we discussed this study with over 2,000 participants. So the
available safety data to support the EUA and adolescents down to 12 included 2,260 participants
aged 12 through 15 enrolled in an ongoing, so it's ongoing to keep looking at these kids
randomized placebo control clinical trial in the United States. Of these 1,131 adolescents
who received the vaccine, they were followed for a minimum, right? It's got to do at least two
months, which they did. And in this analysis among participants without evidence of prior
infection with SARS-CoV-2, no cases of COVID-19 occurred, so 0, 100% protection.
Now, on Wednesday, the ACIP voted unanimously. I don't know why I still get emotional about this,
but I do. I mean, this was a huge, you know, actually brought a tear to my eye when I heard
not only the votes coming in, but the comments afterwards. But the committee unanimously voted
to recommend the Pfizer vaccine for adolescents 12 to 15, and there were really several important
comments. And it was really interesting to hear some of the comments post-vote. Now,
Aporva Mandavili at the New York Times did a really nice job of capturing the comments,
which I appreciate it. I was driving while I was listening, and I was trying to decide,
should I pull over and jot these things down? So, fortunately, they were actually put in print.
Grace, Dr. Grace Lee, a member of the committee and professor of pediatrics at Stanford University
commented that, sometimes we lose the importance of children and adolescents in the midst of pandemic.
There's such a focus on older adults in particular. Dr. Maldonado reinforced that
children may be at lower risk, but they are not at no risk. And she pointed out,
while children's risk of severe illness is low, compared with that of adults,
the coronavirus has infected more than 1.5 million children, sent more than 13,000 children
to hospitals more than our hospitals for flu and an average year, according to the data collected
by the CDC. There was a comment that it is currently, COVID-19, is currently one of the top 10 causes
of death in children since the pandemic began. And remember, this is with full lockdown, with
virtual schools, with in the last year, camps and all these other activities shut down.
I think it's really important to remember that these numbers were what we observed with a rather
draconian lockdown with school closures, virtual learning, masks, everything else, things that,
I remember last February, some of our health experts saying, this will never happen in America.
Well, it happened in America. And despite that, we still had this impact.
Another little bit of good news. I think this is great news that we're going to be expanding
this opportunity to get vaccinated down. I'll let everyone know, my 15-year-old son, Barnaby,
is scheduled Friday evening. So when this drops, he'll already have had his first vaccines. I'll
be able to give some updates, maybe we'll even post a picture if he's willing to check with my wife
first. But we learned about temperature stability. That's always a challenge with a lot of these
vaccines, particularly, right? We think about the Pfizer with these thermal shippers.
And we heard from Pfizer that they actually have an updated formulation, which may allow six months
in the fridge. Well, Moderna is always right there with them. And they recently announced
ongoing development data related to the current formulation that could support a three-month
refrigerated shelf life for the vaccine, and also alternative formats to facilitate easier
distribution to doctors' offices and other smaller settings. And I think this is critical,
and I've talked a little bit about this, is some people are happy to go to these sort of large
vaccination sites, the state-run sites. That's where Barnaby's going. But a lot of people want to
have that conversation with their physician, particularly a lot of parents want to have the
conversation with the pediatrician. What they've done here in New York State, and I think it's
really ingenious, is the Pfizer vaccines come with over 1,000 in this thermal shipper.
Not every pediatrician office is ready to accept 1,000 vaccines, and all the commitments of getting
them out. So there's sort of a cooperative that they've arranged, where several pediatrician groups
can work together to each accept a certain number of the vaccines. They get popped in a fridge,
you got five days, so basically, you're Monday through Friday to get those vaccines into arms.
So there'll be a little bit of flexibility and thinking outside the box to get this done so that
we get to that next level of people who want to have a conversation, want to ask questions.
I'm going to move to the viral symptom phase, right? The time for monitoring and monoclonals.
And we have some data on NSAIDs. So things like ibuprofen, napkin, and we have some reassuring data
on the ability to safely use the non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, such as ibuprofen,
napkin, in COVID-19. And actually, I'd say this is huge. This may not seem huge, but
when a person is suffering through that viral symptomatic phase of COVID, or even starting to
move into the early inflammatory, it can be miserable. And it is amazing what an Aleve
anaperson, a couple ibuprofen can do, particularly the evening when that person is trying to get
some rest. So early on, people may remember, there was a little bit of concern as a letter sent.
But this article in the Lancet Rheumatology, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug use and
outcomes of COVID-19 in the ISA-RIC clinical characterization protocol UK cohort, a matched
prospective cohort study. And so the authors reported on the results of this prospective
multicenter cohort study that included patients admitted to hospital with a confirmatory or highly
suspected SARS-CoV-2 infection between January 17th and August 10th, 2020. The primary outcome
was in hospital mortality. And secondary outcomes were disease severity at presentation, admission
to critical care, receipt of invasive ventilation, receipt of non-invasive ventilatory support,
use of supplementary oxygen, acute kidney injury. And now what did they find?
So this was a pretty robust study. They enrolled 78,674 patients across 255 health care facilities
in England, Scotland, and Wales where there be dragons. In this cohort, 4,211 patients were
recorded as taking systemic incense before admission to hospital. And they report that the
NSAID use was not associated with worse in hospital mortality, not associated with critical care
admission, not associated with the requirement for invasive ventilation, requirement for non-invasive
ventilation, requirement for oxygen, or kidney injury. So basically NSAID use is safe in COVID-19.
Passive vaccination. It actually looks like we're moving closer to full approval or licensure
here as the data is such that recently the FDA said that the data is currently so compelling
that they no longer agree with conducting placebo controlled trials here in the United States.
Basically, this is considered the standard of care and something that should be offered to
patients. A little bit of a challenge for the intramuscular, subcutaneous, and other monoclonal
antibody therapies that are trying to come to market, try to get their trials. We also have
ongoing trials looking at using these agents to protect contacts and high risk individuals
unable to produce their own antibodies. So things are moving with monoclonals. Actually,
it was at the gym today wearing a mask. I don't know if I need to anymore. This was before Dr.
Walensky made the pronouncement. We'll have to see when the rules change, but actually seeing
an advertisement on the television. So pretty exciting stuff that the information is getting out
there. We need to use these more. Now early inflammatory phase, if room air saturations are
less than 94%. That's when we have data that steroids dexamethasone from the recovery trial,
six milligrams once a day for 10 days improves outcomes and saves life. There are certain
situations where people are actually using little higher doses a little bit longer.
But here's where I want to throw in a little bit of caution here. People following the news about
India have probably heard about the black fungus or what is more properly called rhino-cerebral
mucor mycosis. And there was a nice case series published in the journal of laryngeology and
otology. And this was post coronavirus disease mucor mycosis, a deadly addition to the pandemic
spectrum. And I don't know if people are familiar with this. I actually have seen a number of cases
of this in my career and actually a number of cases when I was spending time in India.
Here the authors describe 23 cases and the association with diabetes overzealous use of steroids,
use of broad spectrum antibiotics, I'll add to treat a viral disease, and perhaps unclean oxygen
delivery devices. They have some great images in this article disturbing images. They're not
the actual looking and seeing in the open mouth of a patient that black s car, which is the fungus
eating away. But if you do, if you look inside the mouth, and I mentioned I spent some time in
Tamil Nadu where I saw some cases in the Indian population of this where you look inside the mouth
and on the roof of the mouth, there's this black s car where the fungus is basically eating away
the person's face and oral cavity. It's truly horrific. And I've even seen where it progresses
and eats away the eye. But this is really a caution. This is a viral disease. They do not need these
broad spectrum antibiotics. This steroids has somewhat of a benefit, but you do not keep these
patients on steroids for three weeks. You don't give steroids and let the glucosees go really high.
So where we're seeing a lot of this in India, this is really, we'll say iatrogenic, which means
we're causing this. So we need to be a little bit careful here, please. Remdesivir has some
minor impact at huge expense, I like to say. Anticoagulation for hospitalized patients.
The science strongly recommends against HCQ at this point. I apologize, but that's where we are.
There was a paper published in Nature Communications, mortality outcomes with hydroxychloroquine
and chloroquine in COVID-19 from an international collaborative meta-analysis of randomized trials.
And here the authors presented a meta-analysis of ongoing completed or discontinued randomized
control trials on hydroxychloroquine or chloroquine treatment for any COVID-19 patients.
They reported on all-cause mortality, and they looked at publications, preprints. They even
reached out to the investigators to get more information if needed. Looking through 63 trials
were potentially eligible for inclusion. They include 14 unpublished trials with 1,308 patients,
14 publications, preprints with 9,011 patients. They included the recovery and the WHO solidarity
trials, which included 4,716 and 1,853 patients. Basically, just to say, the combined odds ratio
on all-cause mortality for hydroxychloroquine was 1.11 for chloroquine, 1.77. Basically,
they were reporting that treatment with hydroxychloroquine was associated with
increased mortality. So it looks like HCQ is associated with a 10% increase in mortality.
I think we need to move past that. Oxygen and pulmonary support, antibiotics are not helpful for
treating viral infections. And as I mentioned, the experience here can increase the risk of
kidney failure, progression to dialysis, death, and increase the risk of opportunistic infections,
which can harm or actually, in some cases, kill our patients. We mentioned last time some data,
tosyllismab added to steroids can improve outcomes and have a mortality benefit. Consider this
early in patients not reporting, not responding to steroids. It's not something you want to wait
to do. And this is something which has now actually been added to the ID society guidelines.
Tail phase long COVID post-COVID. So our listeners may have heard that Dr. John Brooks,
the chief medical officer for the CDC is COVID-19 responses. Let it be known that there will be
forthcoming guidance from the CDC on how healthcare providers can identify long COVID
and manage long COVID. And there will likely be a specific ICD-10 code, a diagnosed code
for long COVID. And I was asked for some input on the sky and said it really looks like they're
doing a great job recognizing that not all patients have access to testing during the acute phase
or test positive by serology when they come to medical attention. I expect that this guidance
will likely focus on the multidisciplinary team approach that many of our centers are finding so
critical for meeting the needs of these patients. I also think it's really nice that this is kind
of a new model. They're reaching out to some of these support groups. They're trying to get input
from patients. I know survivor core has been asked to basically input on this. So I really think that
this is going to be incredibly helpful for sharing the knowledge serving as an educational resource
for all the many clinicians who are really stepping up and helping take care of these patients.
Now I will finish by mentioning our fundraiser. So if you're not driving,
stop what you're doing. Go to parasiteswithoutporters.com and help us support
Foundation International Medical Relief of Children. This is an organization with sites
throughout the world and the patients they care for are struggling. The young volunteers who
usually go out to these sites, the financial support that they usually have to do all this
tremendous work. It's not there. And if you look at these places, they have a couple of sites in
India. They have sites in Sub-Saharan Africa, sites in South America. They have sites in so many of
these places that are being so hard hit with COVID. Please help us support them so that we can
really go beyond our borders and help address these global issues. All right, time for some
questions for Daniel. You can send yours to Daniel at microbe.tv. First is from Pete.
I have just sent money to a friend in India for oxygen, $500 for a cylinder,
$204 a fill that would probably help two people. I'm thinking monoclonal, monoclonals would be a
better option. Any idea how much and how to get them there? Yeah, so these are challenges. That's
amazing that that amount of money is being taken for cylinders and these other things. And really
frustrating that there was not better preparation for what's going on in India right now. I was
actually told by someone, I work with actually a lot of Indian clinicians and that Remdesivir,
for instance, was negotiated. So at least Remdesivir is only about $15 or $20 a dose in India. So
that's better than $3,000 for a course here in the United States. But access to the monoclonals
is difficult. There actually is a bit of a black market where the monoclonals, I don't know how
they're actually being initially procured, but they seem to be being sent over to India. So
I'm not going to endorse the black market. But yeah, when you start looking at these price points,
when someone's paying that amount of money for oxygen, then some of these other costs just
don't seem quite as high. So if anything, I think this just highlights what a tragedy is going on
over there. David writes, universities are starting to implement vaccine mandates for
their students. Since a lot of students come from overseas, the question keeps coming up,
what do we do about students vaccinated with non FDA approved vaccines, AstraZeneca,
Cinevax button, Covax and et cetera, revaccinate them seems kind of extreme given the existing
manufacturing shortages, except non FDA approved vaccines in the context of a mandate or just
some of them. Is there formal guidance? Obviously, there has to be a line drawn somewhere, but I'm
not sure who draws this line. Yeah, I've actually seen that the CDC is starting to put together a
guidance here. And what they are saying basically is if it's us FDA approved vaccines, all right,
that counts. But then you get into something like what about AstraZeneca. So that's the current
guidance. The current guidance, if somebody has vaccines that are FDA approved, considers effective,
then that can be considered as adequately fully vaccinated, the same criteria two weeks after
the last shot in the series. But so far, the rules are if a person got vaccines that our FDA
has not fully reviewed, has not fully endorsed or licensed or given an EUA, right, we're in the
world of EUAs, then we actually have to go ahead and revaccinate. And I think this is tough because
I'm going to say in the next sentence, we have an abundance of vaccines here in the United States,
we have the capability to do that. That's a little bit of an embarrassment, right, when
we're talking about places like India, where those vaccines would make a huge difference.
And what is the cheapest way to keep someone from dying from COVID-19, it's to vaccinate them.
Tiffany writes, I have a co-worker who has gout. She had a terrible flare up about a week after
getting her first vaccination. Is there any chance these events are connected? Her doctor told her
they probably are, but it seems weird to me. She found this article on podiatry today,
connecting gout attacks to vaccinations. I was just wondering what you think,
I don't want any more reasons for people not to get vaccinated if they aren't based on fact.
Yeah, so it would not surprise me, right? We often, well, as an infectious disease doctor,
we often see inflammatory triggers related to gout flares, right? And you can imagine how
bad that gout flare would be if you actually had COVID. And I've certainly seen patients who
come in with COVID. I've certainly seen patients that come in with pneumonia, urate tract infections.
You know, the gout is something that is driven by an inflammatory process,
and something like a vaccine potentially could trigger that. It very easily treated, right?
You treat it with ibuprofen or a leaf or a cultucine, right? We have many, many therapeutics for this.
And I think that we need to be honest, right? And this was something mentioned on the last
twist with is people get vaccines, they might have joint pain, they might have muscle pain.
It might be more than just that 24 hours. A colleague of mine actually had really bad
vertigo world spinning for several days after a vaccine. So there can be side effects. Why are
we recommending these products with these horrible side effects? It's because you know,
what's really horrible? Getting COVID-19. What's really horrible is dying of COVID-19. What's
really horrible is having a breathing to put down into your trachea because you've got COVID-19
and didn't get vaccinated. So we always talk about the risk benefits, boy, the risk and harmful
potentialities of not being vaccinated. That's why we're vaccinating everyone.
Lindsey writes, is there any evidence that people with a previous history of autoimmune platelet
disorders like immune or thrombotic thrombocytopenic perpera are at increased risk of CVST from an
adenovirus-vectored SARS-CoV-2 vaccine? Or if given one of those vaccines, should someone with such
a history be monitored for signs of CVST more closely than someone who didn't?
Yeah, you know, that's a great question, right? Because we sort of had this knee-jerk reaction
that, well, boy, if you've had a problem like that in the past, that, oh, you're someone who
should be at higher risk, we would think what has been shocking, right? We continue to track this,
right? We continue to see the rare CVST associated with JJ. I'm going to say that. I think there's
a connection there. I think we're all comfortable saying that rare as it continues to be.
But we are interesting enough not seeing this connection, not seeing it occur in people with
prior disorders, as you've described, even though that would have been the population we would think
about seeing it in. So no, this group is not at any higher risk. This continues to be incredibly
rare because it is so rare. Any intervention we might do is more likely to do harm than just watch
for waiting. All right, the last one, Daniel, we read on Twiv and we thought actually you should
answer it because we didn't have an answer. This is from Haley, who is a 26-year-old healthy
woman who got a Pfizer vaccine, both doses, got a lot of side effects, and many of them
lasting a long time. She now has daily headaches, muscle and joint pain, can't exercise. Her doctors
don't know what to do. She's regretting, having gotten the vaccine. She says, please help.
Yeah, I mean, I think this echoes what I was saying before, is that for not everyone, is it just,
oh, I felt bad for 24 hours, or I was sort of fortunate. I barely noticed that I was getting
my vaccination. Some individuals, like is being described here, can have risk or joint pain.
They can have muscle pain, and sometimes that can last for several weeks. We're usually recommending
that people take non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medicines for these, and this tends to last weeks.
We are not seeing so far, right, that this turns into anything long-term. I understand that the
frustration and the regret here. But if you are having difficulty, I mean, that's why we set up a
lot of these centers to try to help people. And as I think a lot of our listeners know,
I'm always happy to answer questions and to potentially step in and help in a situation like
this. So have your doctors reach out, and I'm happy to hopefully help guide you through this process.
That's COVID-19 clinical update number 62 with Dr. Daniel Griffin. Thank you, Daniel.
Oh, thank you so much. And everyone, be safe.
