This week in virology, the podcast about viruses, the kind that make you sick.
From Microbe TV, this is Twiv, this week in virology, episode 758 recorded on May 20, 2021.
I'm Vincent Rack in yellow, and you are listening to the podcast all about viruses.
Joining me today from New York, Daniel Griffin.
Hello, everyone. Daniel, this is clinical update number 63. How will we know when the pandemic's
over, Daniel? That's a great question. When will it shift from being a pandemic to just,
hey, there's still COVID-19 around and it's become less of a pandemic?
And maybe, Vincent, maybe you're the person to answer that question, because what was the point
when polio ceased to be a pandemic and started to be just something we were trying to get rid of?
Now, polio was around before we had this word pandemic, so we never got the call in a pandemic.
But Daniel, would you say we're still in the middle of an HIV AIDS pandemic?
Yeah, and I try to make that point. I've been offered a couple of people have reached out and
said, oh, would you like to write a book? And I am working on a book that Chuck Knersch connected
me with about sort of what happened with the vaccines and what was the rollout like.
But the whole idea about writing a book about, oh, we've survived the pandemic or I have no other
people have written these books. And it reminded me of a movie, and it was surviving the pandemic,
and it was about HIV. And I remember talking to my buddy, Joe McGowan, I was like, I don't understand.
It's not over. There are over 30 million people infected with HIV. We see another 50,000 new
infections every year in the US. We see, you know, half a million to a million people every year
dying of HIV. Explain to me how we're not still in the midst of that pandemic.
That's right. So yeah, Daniel, before you start, what's on your bow tie today?
You know, it kind of looks like a coronavirus, doesn't it? Yeah, it's very nice with the
little coronas there. So all right. Yeah, our listeners may not know this, but it was about
every one of my bow ties is an infectious disease. And whenever I appear on Friday, it's always a
sexually transmitted infectious disease. And when you take care of patients, do you wear these
infectious bow ties? I do, I do. Very good. And I started doing it in part as a teaching thing
for the residents and medical students. So that was always, I actually, my socks match. I won't
show those now, but they match the pathogen. So maybe I'm wearing like one with little red
snappers. So there's supposed to cue them that it's tuberculosis. I have an anthrax. I have
several others. Great. Love it.
All right, let's jump right in with my quotation. We are drowning in information,
but starved for knowledge. And that's by John Nasebitt. And I think this is so relevant,
because it's really this fire hose of information. We're seeing it all around COVID, but this is
just the modern world. And we're always struggling to make sense of what does all this information
mean? How do we actually get from information to knowledge? So hopefully we play a part in doing
that. Let me start with the updates. How are things? Things are really much better here in the US
here in New York. One of our local hospitals I discharged to I think is at least for the moment,
this will be no COVID patients left in the hospital after this gentleman goes home. He's
probably home already with his wife and twins. So that's very exciting. Other big hospitals
in our area down to single digit numbers of COVID cases. My partner, New Julie, just admitted
someone today with COVID. And as you can imagine, this is a woman who did not get her vaccine,
you know, diabetic who really should have been taking that opportunity. So that's what we're
seeing now. We're seeing younger individuals. We're seeing people who did not take the opportunity
to get vaccinated. But the numbers really, you know, exponentially seem to be going down.
I continue to have that optimism that we're going to be in a really great place across the
country in July. There certainly are areas with poor vaccine uptake. And you know, you worry about
those areas starting to see a rise when people get back indoors either because it got so gosh darn
hot, they're in for air conditioning or when it gets cold again and people are indoors for the warmth.
Around the world, right? I'm sort of parallel with the HIV. We are in no way at the end of this
pandemic. And until we are more generous until we're able to get everyone in the world vaccinated,
we are not safe joking today about first world problems where people complain about their chairs
not as comfortable as they would like. There's plenty of places in the world without chairs,
right? And I think that's the vaccine story at this point. I will say as we get into this,
we certainly have evolving recommendations, have people's heads a little bit spinning. But that's
actually what we wanted. We wanted to learn. We are not where we were a year ago. A year ago,
we did not know much. We actually know a tremendous amount now. And as we learn more,
as the science comes in, then we can actually revise what people are being told to do.
What we know is safe. What we know is not safe. So we'll go through that. But I'm going to
start with my children and COVID. This is always the crowd pleaser or not.
Paul Offit appeared on the podcast Track the Vax with Serena Marshall. That's another one of
the podcasts that I enjoy listening to. I actually was on, I was a guest on the 13th episode of Track
the Vax. And Serena is wonderful. I miss that it wasn't as raw, I think as Twiv is, because at one
point, she asked me a question. And I replied, and she just started laughing to the point where
she had to actually stop the recording. And she edited that out. I thought that was great. But
not all my jokes are bad. So this episode with Paul Offit was the May 18th episode. I'm giving
a little plug for them called Next Up in Line for COVID Vaccines Kids. And it was really a great,
great discussion between Serena and Paul. And Paul Offit brought up the fact really that I
try to reinforce on a regular basis that yes, kids are actually at some risk. It's not huge,
it certainly is lower. But the reason we're recommending vaccination to adolescents at this
point is not for the greater good. It's actually to protect them. It's like putting a seatbelt on
them, putting a helmet on them. And let me quote Paul Offit what he said during that discussion.
You have at least 300 children who've died from this infection and estimates are it could be as
high as 500. He's talking about just right here in the United States. He also pointed out that we
did a really great job. I like to reinforce this initially of protecting our children early in
the pandemic with only 2.4% of those total infections in the early months being in children.
Now things are changing. Now children account for 24% of the infections. My colleagues, as I
mentioned, are admitting adolescents to ICUs, number of articles and releases about the shift
into younger ages. I'm also going to add here that per CDC, the number of confirmed multi-system
inflammatory syndrome cases in children. So that's that Miss C is approaching 4,000.
And there are many more that are still under investigation, including about 500 just right
here in New York State. I don't want to blow that out of proportion because I like to say
children are at low risk. They're not at no risk. But there are things we can do to keep these kids
safe. It has been really difficult for a lot of these children. Actually, I will say for us parents
to have schools closed, to have a lot of these other social and other opportunities closed. But
there was another MMWR publication hot off the press today as we're recording this. Characteristics
of COVID-19 cases and outbreaks at childcare facilities, District of Columbia, July through
December 2020. And here the authors were reporting on 469 childcare facilities in the District of
Columbia. As far as facility associated outbreaks, they occurred in 5.8% of the facilities. The other
flip of that is you could say over 94% of the facilities had no outbreaks. The childcare facilities
in D.C. were able to adhere to many of the recommended prevention measures and reporting
requirements. And basically they did a good job. The kids were able to be in these settings and
they reported that really similar to what had been observed in other studies. The rise in the
COVID-19 cases and outbreaks correlated with level of community spread. So I think that's
really a positive message here. We can get these kids out in these settings. We can do it safely.
We've learned how to do that. We now have the lowest positive test rates across this country,
actually ever. Early on when we started testing, I remember New York, like 80% of the tests were
coming back positive. In a recent article that I tweeted out, I should tell people just follow my
Twitter at Daniel Griffin MD because I try to get a lot of these articles out there. But really
showing how a lack of testing plagued us early on. Now we are doing a lot of testing and you know
you're doing enough testing or you're doing a lot of testing when you're getting a positivity rate
of down in the 1% or 2% nationally. So really going in the right direction here for improving
the risk for our children. I should probably tell this story here. I always try to be careful
when I talk about risk and I talk about no risk. My wife asked me yesterday, she was going to give
Barnaby a sandwich with a Swiss cheese, turkey and mayo and it had been an insulated thing and
there was a blue iced thing in there. But now the blue iced thing was no longer cold. So she
wasn't enough. It was still okay for Barnaby to put in a new blue ice pack. And I had not
taken off my work hat. So I said, oh, that seems like a very low risk decision going ahead and
letting you have that. My wife's response was, I don't want a low risk. I want no risk for our
son Barnaby. I was like, no, it's fine. We can eat that's how it will be fine. So I know we want
absolutes. But even when it comes to sandwiches, we don't have absolutes. All right, pre exposure
transmission. On Friday, May 14th, the article interim estimates of vaccine effectiveness of Pfizer,
BioNTech and Moderna COVID-19 vaccines among healthcare personnel, 33 US sites January through
March 2021. Right. So this is this is hot off the press. This became available as an early release.
And on the last tweet of clinical update, Vincent had asked mainly to address questions from our
audience about how we knew about safety and efficacy of vaccines beyond the initial large
RCTs, right? We were talking about the latest adolescent trials, only 2,000 people in there. But
what are they doing over time? So I brought up theirs. But here, this is one of these
trials that continues to give us information after those RCTs. So here the authors report on a
case control study of mRNA COVID-19 vaccine efficacy, V E with HCP healthcare personnel,
being enrolled at these 33 sites across the United States. So these were healthcare personnel
with the potential for exposure to SARS-CoV-2 through direct patient contact or for, you know,
indirect exposure. So think about these are these are people who are exposed, right? So you're
getting an exposure here. They had they had case patients, they had control participants.
And these were being identified through routine employee testing performed onsite
through their occupational health practices. They went ahead and the healthcare personnel with a
positive SARS-CoV-2 PCR or antigen based test result. And at least one COVID-19 like illness
were enrolled as the cases. And then we had the negatives being those who did not have a PCR.
You know, it didn't matter if these people had symptoms, right? If they had something else going
on as long as they did not have COVID. And as of March 18, 2021, 623 case patients, 1,220 controls
were enrolled. And they gave us an effectiveness estimate of a complete 2 dose regimen of these
vaccines at 94%, which is really actually consistent with the clinical trials. And I should say
surprising, right? We were not expecting, you know, the real world is usually not as good as what we
see. But what are the limitations here? So first, testing for SARS-CoV-2 infection among healthcare
providers was based on occupational health practices at each facility. And, you know,
vaccinated people may have actually been less likely to go for testing, possibly underestimating
the efficacy. They, you know, thinking, hey, I've been vaccinated, I'm not as worried about a
little bit of sniffles here. So that is one issue. And the authors comment on this as well.
Second, again, limited sample size. You know, we love our tens, our 20s, our 30,000. So this
was not as big as sample size. And third, right? It's not clear that you can generalize this to
the entire US population, right? So different races, different ethnic groups age, right? We've
certainly started to get a sense that the vaccine has different efficacy based upon age, good data
starting to support that. And fourth, the healthcare personnel with a known past SARS-CoV-2 infection
were excluded, right? We're vaccinating those individuals, giving them protection.
So again, are those people going to get better or worse protection than people who did not have
that exposure prior to vaccination? We think that they may actually be even more protected. So
that 94%, another reason why maybe even underestimation. So now this was actually the data that came out
the day after our last Twiv and the headline, making comments by the current CDC director about
vaccines and masking. So I certainly have gotten a lot of questions. So I'm going to spend a little
bit of time discussing that sort of in this context. So what was that all about? So I think
there were several points that was based on. And I think the CDC director has been really clear
that the recommendations were science driven. And what is that science? Well, one of the bits of
science that has just been building, and this was another brick in that wall, is that vaccines
can be incredibly powerful at protecting a vaccinated person, right? So the person vaccinated,
as long as they have an intact immune system, as long as they come out of response, they can
have a tremendous amount of infection. I will be talking about people that can't get that.
The second, and this I think is an important point, growing evidence that an asymptomatic
vaccinated person is at very low risk for transmitting to others, right? Incredibly low
chance that they're even going to turn PCR positive. And then we have data suggesting that if they're
asymptomatic and PCR positive, that is at such a low level that it may actually be below level of
transmission. So that was the second part. What are the other caveats I think that need to be put
into this whole situation? 4% of people in the US have impaired immune systems due to disease
or medications. So that's about 10 million people that are unable to protect themselves
with active vaccination, right? So they are relying on the kindness, the decision to get
vaccinated, the masking, the non pharmaceutical and the vaccine mitigation measures. The other
is what about children 11 and under who do not have access to the vaccination and the protection
that this could offer? That's another 50 million people here, right? Who are at risk if someone is
unvaccinated, infected with SARS-CoV-2 and walking around? The other point that people are bringing
up and I think is relevant is children 12 to 15 just got access. So millions of these kids who
have not had time to get that second shot, not had time to get to that full protection.
And so many, many, rightfully so in the US worry that unvaccinated people will be dishonest
and take their masks off around vulnerable people and infect them giving them COVID. So
I think there's a lot going on here. The only state that I'm aware of with any sort of a real
robust verification system is New York here with our Excelsior Pass, which is already being used
and already planned for use for sporting events to verify that you get to sit in that vaccinated
section, et cetera. So remember, the CDC is not the police. They are a public health agency and
this is the science. The policing, that's going to be someone else's job.
Now, one of the things that comes up in this context is people who say, well, I don't know if
I need to get a vaccine because I already had the COVID. I should be fine. So what about that?
How much protection against reinfection do you get with prior infection? And boy, have we come
far in a year, right? A year ago, there was the whole discussion is reinfection even a thing.
Well, I think we've moved past that. And now really the question is, what rate are we seeing
this? If you've been infected, what percent does that protect you relative to vaccination,
for instance? And I've always been shocked that there's a group of people out there who would
who would somehow prefer natural infection to a vaccine. I'm seeing a lady now who got chicken
pox, right, instead of a vaccine. And she has this recurrent zoster all over her face. She actually
have to wear a mask. She keeps having issues trying to get employment because at job interviews,
this is an issue. Polio, right? I think Vincent right up your alley. If you could get a polio
vaccine or just take that chance of maybe a little bit of paralysis for the rest of your life. I
always shocked here. But here's some data. And this was the study Risk of SARS-CoV-2
reinfection in a university student population published in CID, Clinical Infectious Disease.
And they reported on a retrospective analysis of 2021 students with prior infection and 14,080
students without previous infection. So these were age 17 to 24. And they reported an 84% lower risk
of infection compared to the unvaccinated students over a study period of four months.
So I just want to give a comparator here. Remember, this is an age group with almost 100%
protection with vaccination. And here only an 84% reduction with prior infection. And this is
just in that window just the four months. So my takeaway here is we saw dozens of reinfections
in these young adults in this short period. Prior infection is not vaccination testing.
Never miss an opportunity to test. We are back into the realm. I want to remind everyone of the
indeterminate test. We now have rates that are dropping back so low that we are back to those
issues of what is the positive predictive value and what is the negative predictive
value of a test. And if our listeners remember that far back, but I'm glad that we're circling
back to there. This is the situation where I'll start with sort of the high numbers.
Back when we had a disease prevalence of 30%. If you used a test that was 80% sensitive,
99% specific, right? We're thinking of like PCR, some of our antigen tests here.
If a person had a positive test, 97% of the time that was truly positive. Only 3% of the time was
that false. If it was negative, your negative predictive value is up in the 90s as well.
But what happens when we drop to where we are now? What if the disease prevalence is down at 1%
using that same test? If it's negative, okay, it is negative with even higher certainty than we
had to begin with. But what if it is positive? The false positive rate now is going to exceed
50%. It's going to be at 55%. So now it's becoming really important at a lot of our testing sites
to have that second test ready to go. So if you get a positive, or what I will say,
an indeterminate initial result, you want to be ready to employ a second test to determine if
that's really a true positive. And this is also going to be a little bit of communication with
each state's Department of Health. Do they want that indeterminate reported? How are you allowed
to respond? All right, active vaccination never miss an opportunity to vaccinate.
And I will call this perhaps patience is a good thing. And so we saw the preprint results of a
study looking at extended interval boosting of the Pfizer, BioNTech vaccine entitled
extended interval, BNT162B2 vaccination enhances peak antibody generation in older people. And
can you guess what they saw? Well, yes, this is the secret of a well crafted title. It's all right
there. The authors reported on 175 people over the age of 80 and found a peak antibody response
that was 3.5 fold higher with an extended interval of 11 to 12 weeks versus the standard
three weeks, right? So 3.5 times higher by just waiting that extra point. And I think this makes
sense, right? We did our studies at three weeks at four weeks, you know, because as I tell my
daughter, Eloise, 95% is good enough. We don't need 98, you know, these older individuals where
maybe we don't have as robust responses we might like, also start thinking about those people with
immunocompromise where there were issues, maybe an extended interval, even we'll talk in the future
about some of these heterologous or mix and match boosting approaches. For a population,
we may be getting where we need to be, right? Because I think it was quoted on the last
twiv, a little bit of discussion there with Kathy and Alan and Rich and the gang about
if someone gets vaccinated, we're only seeing your chance of dying only. And I think I'm going to
use the word only here is one in 500,000 people. And that includes all these people who come back
with a negative antibody test, come back with a low tight or anybody test after vaccines.
The vaccines are incredibly effective. I don't know if we need 3.5 higher, but at least it says
that if there is a weight, depending on your vaccination strategy, you're not getting lower
antibodies, you're actually getting significantly higher. Three, the period of detectable viral
replication, the viral symptom phase, as I like to say, the time for monitoring and monoclonals.
And remember, NSAIDs are fine for symptom relief. I'm going to sort of combine pull-in passive
vaccination and the early inflammatory phase here together. And part of it, I'm going to bring up
the issue that timing matters. So what am I talking about here? So we finally saw the peer-reviewed
results of the recovery trial results on convalescent plasma in patients admitted to hospital
in the Lancet. So as people may know, I feel like that's a little bit late, right? We're waiting
until the early inflammatory phase. We're not getting convalescent plasma in during that first
week. Well, let's see what we saw here. The title was convalescent plasma in patients admitted to
hospital with COVID-19 recovery, a randomized controlled open-label platform trial. And at this
point, our listeners are perhaps familiar with their recovery trial out of the UK. And just what
are those letters stand for? This is a randomized controlled open-label platform trial, randomized
evaluation of COVID-19 therapy, looking really at several possible treatments in patients with
COVID-19 in the UK. The trial is still underway at 177 NHS hospitals from across the UK.
And this is the trial that introduced steroids at the right time, in the right patients,
at the right dose as the standard of care. We also got some significant results from
recovery on the potential harm and lack of benefit of HCQ. And most recently, the compelling data
demonstrating the mortality benefits and other benefits of adding tosyllism app to steroids
for the treatment of COVID at the right time in the right patient. And this paper describes
the results of patients who are randomly assigned one to one to receive either usual care or usual
care plus high-tighter convalescent plasma. The primary outcome was 28-day mortality,
and it was analyzed on an intent to treat basis. So between May 28th, 2020 and January 15th, 2021,
11,558 individuals were assigned to either the convalescent plasma group or the usual care group.
And what did they find? They reported no significant difference in 28-day mortality between the two
groups, 24% versus 24%. The 28-day mortality rate was similar in all pre-specified subgroups of
patients. No significant effect on the proportion of patients discharged from the hospital within
28 days, again, 66% in the convalescent plasma, 66% in the usual care. Among those not uninvasive
mechanical ventilation at randomization, again, no significant difference in the proportion of
patients, meaning the composite endpoint, a progression to invasive mechanical ventilation
or death. So in summary, this was a robust, well-powered study using high-tighter convalescent plasma
early after admission. So they were getting it in within, it was a median of two days after admission.
No benefit was observed. If anything, I feel like I'm quoting Mark Chrislep,
a non-statistically significant trend toward a 20% higher rate of mechanical ventilation if you
look closely at Figure 2. So that means that, yeah, there was a trend there, but they did not actually
find benefit anywhere. There was a little bit of a suggestion that maybe if you had a larger study,
you would have started to see harm, actually. They also did a meta-analysis of the 10 major trials
to date. And I will say here, again, the totality of data putting all these trials together did not
support a benefit to convalescent plasma for hospitalized patients. Now, the authors did comment
that recovery only included patients admitted to hospital. So this trial doesn't really address
whether or not there's maybe a narrow window early in disease where convalescent plasma might
provide some benefit. And that question has not yet been robustly tested in a sufficiently
large randomized control trial. And they actually did reference a trial that we've discussed here,
which was the New England Journal trial. This was early high Titer Plasmotherapy to prevent
severe COVID-19 in older adults. And that was that small study with 80 patients in a geriatric
unit in Argentina who got plasma within 72 hours. And there there was a report of some benefit on
disease progression. So just sort of putting, I will say, the hospitalized patients really robust
data from this trial, as well as a meta-analysis of 10 other trials, really a labor-intensive
approach. And we're not seeing data here to support it. But is there something that's sort of similar
that can be given during that first seven to 10 days? What about those monoclonal cocktails?
So we got another press release. This was actually presented at a conference. But what was the
press release? This was from Regeneron. Phase 3 data that was also presented at the American
thoracic Society 2021 meeting. Regen Kove. So this is the Casariva Mab with
MDivumab, reduced risk of hospitalization or death by 70% in non-hospitalized COVID-19 patients.
So this was a phase three randomized double-blind placebo control trial, evaluating the Regeneron
cocktail in 4,567 high-risk patients with COVID-19. And they studied two doses, right? The currently
authorized 2,400 milligram dose and a 1,200 milligram dose, so half the dose. And they evaluated all
these patients for efficacy. They all had one of the risk factors, right, to include them in this
study. And the Regeneron Kove cocktail met its primary and all secondary endpoints with similar
efficacy for both doses. And they saw this for 1,200 milligrams or 2,400 milligrams. So
70% and 71% reduced risk of hospitalization or death through day 29 compared to placebo for
both doses. A four-day shorter time to symptom resolution and reduced viral load. And that had
a p-value of 0.0001 for both. Great safety data, as mentioned, there's thousands of individuals.
One person had an anaphylactic reaction that resolved with therapy. A little bit more on monoclonal.
So this was again another exciting week. Updated and expanded emergency use authorization for
the monoclonal cocktails, now including more medical conditions. And the BMI has been dropped
down to only being greater than 25. So just to give a sense of what that means. So for a man
who is my height, 5 foot 10, I would only need to weigh 175 pounds or more to be allowed to
squeeze in under BMI alone. So this is really expanding down to many of us, except maybe those
really fit athletic people like my son, Barnaby, who keeps getting new personal records in the mile.
But we also had, and I think this is critical to updated info on efficacy relative to different
variants. So this is what worries me about the variants is the impact on monoclonal therapy.
So in these new updated FDA EUA documents, there are a couple tables. There's a table looking at
the variant substitutions and their impact on the Eli Lilly cocktail with the B117. No change
in susceptibility. But when we get into the B1351, originally described in South Africa,
we are seeing a 215 fold reduction in susceptibility. When we look at the P1, say originally described
in Brazil, we are seeing greater than 46. Remember, both of these have very similar
key substitutions. So the K417N or T, the E484K and the N501Y. And then the B1427 and the B1429,
originally described in California, that have the L452R about a ninefold reduction. And the B1526,
that's New York City's, that also has the E44K, that's about a 31 fold reduction in susceptibility.
So in contrast, the Regeneron cocktail did not show any fold reduction in susceptibility
for any of these key substitutions or for any of these variants. So it now becomes, I'll say,
pretty critical when you're deciding which monoclonal cocktail to use to have a sense of what variants
are prevalent in your area. Because you may be having reduced benefit to your therapy,
if you're giving it to a patient who has one of these key substitutions.
Still in this section, remember, this is that early inflammatory phase.
So if those oxygen saturations drop below 94, that's when we have data that steroids,
dexamethasone, 6 milligrams a day for 10 days, improves outcomes, is associated with a mortality
benefit. Be careful with higher or longer doses, remdesivir, minor impact at huge expense,
still recommending anticoagulation for our hospitalized patients. At least prophylactic dose is
associated with improved outcomes, mortality benefit. We still really need better studies in this space.
Oxygen and pulmonary support, as we're seeing in India, so critical to have that ability to
deliver oxygen. Antibiotics, not helpful for treating viral infections and can be harmful.
As we mentioned, tosyllizumab can be added to steroids in a certain subset of patients,
appears to have a mortality benefit if used appropriately early in patients not responding to
steroids. And all right, we're going to get into our tail phase of our discussion, our long COVID
part. We have, finally, I have the paper, I say, finally, because this was preprint. Now it's
published in BMJ. I spent some time going through this. The paper is risk of clinical sequelae
after the acute phase of SARS-CoV-2 infection, retrospective cohort study. And this was in the
BMJ. And this was generated really from a huge data set of 266,586 individuals with SARS-CoV-2
infection aged 18 to 65. So I sort of encourage you, we're looking at a younger group of patients
here than some of the other studies. And at minimum, right, I'm hoping Vincent will post this on
parasites without borders for people to link into. But I encourage listeners to go there and to
at minimum look at figure two in this paper. There's a few takeaways from this paper.
One of them is that 14% of adults aged less than or equal to 65 who were infected with
SARS-CoV-2 had at least one new type of clinical sequelae that required medical care
after the acute phase of the illness, right? So we're seeing about 14% here in the under 65.
The people at higher risk were those people that had been in the hospital.
Just to shout out to some of the authors, actually a couple of these authors are friends of mine.
I work with them at United Health Group, Sarah Daugherty. We've been working on a bunch of long
COVID stuff and Ken Cohen. We published a paper a little while back together. But let's just hit a
little bit about why am I telling you to look at figure two. One of the really difficult things
is that people who get acute COVID can end up with a number of other clinical sequelae at
significantly higher levels. And what are those? Not surprising, interstitial lung disease,
the hazard ratio for that is greater than 7.5. This is really troubling. And I know I come back
to this a lot, but encephalopathy. This is about a hazard ratio of greater than six. And this is
really difficult. You see a lot of really high functioning individuals who now are having difficulty
on so many levels and actually being told, oh, it's all in your head, et cetera. Well, I guess it's
all inside the skull. Yes, it is damage and impact on the brain. We're also seeing cardiomyopathy.
And that's about three has ratio about three. We're seeing heart failure. We're seeing arrhythmias.
We're seeing memory difficulty amnesia. We're seeing these people being more than twice as
likely to develop a stroke, peripheral neuropathy. A lot of these are small fiber issues affecting
gut motility and other things. So really a tough space. And a lot of people are trying to jump in
and understand. And we're looking forward to the CDC guidance on this. And I guess I should say,
we're still waiting for that really good data on people with long COVID and the impact of vaccines.
So I'll say a friend and colleague of mine, Akiko Iwasaki up at Yale. She's actually come on Fridays
to our Steve Goff weekly lab meetings. So I got to know her then. And she has a long COVID study.
So people can just email covidrecovery at Yale.edu. If you have long COVID and you're thinking about
getting a vaccine, that's a great way to connect. And then we can start getting some really good data.
We continue to see this. I say anecdotally, which, you know, the plural of anecdote is not data.
It's anecdotes. And so we really want to get this quantified. We want to get a sense of who gets
better or the timing, et cetera. So all right, I'm going to close there. And I'm going to say,
thank you everyone for your incredibly generous support going to parasites without borders
and helping us support femric and all the great work Foundation International Medical
Relief of Children continues to do throughout the world. These are tough times and no one safe
until everyone is safe. Time for some questions for Daniel. You can send yours to Daniel at microbe.tv.
Patricia writes, one topic I have not seen anywhere is drug metabolism. I seem to be a poor metabolizer
of drugs. I've been like this my life. Even Asper cream can put me to sleep night quill. I'm out for
24 hours. These are just two examples. At age 58, I feel getting vaccinated is important, but I
don't dare try because of how I always react to drugs. If I can handle any, it's a child's dosage
at best. Can you point me to more info on this? I can't seem to find any discussion on this topic
as it relates to vaccine. Or if you know the answer to whether it would be safe for me to get
vaccinated, that would be helpful too. Okay. Well, I'm going to encourage you to get vaccinated
first off. But let me explain what I know. Usually I tell people, oh, these are vaccines. They're
not something that gets metabolized. But there is a little bit of detail here. And I'll go into
what do we know about this? People who are on particular medications that are metabolized by
the liver so that hepatic cytochrome SIP 450 system. We actually can see sometimes, and we think it's
cytokine induced, right? You get your vaccine, there's that reactogenicity. Sometimes if anything,
it can increase the metabolism of certain medications. And we want to know about stuff like this,
right? If somebody's on Warfarin, okay, no interaction there. Some other medications,
what actually is happening here is improving the metabolism. It's speeding up to metabolism of
certain medications. Most of the studies in this area have not suggested that it's
of significant or clinical relevance. But yeah, there is a little bit of a subtle issue here.
But if you're a poor metabolizer, well, temporarily, you're going to be a slightly better metabolizer.
Victoria writes, I'm the parent of the 13 year old daughter who has down syndrome.
My family has been careful during the year working in schooling from home, reducing our risk. But
this has come at great cost to our 13 year old schooling and social development because remote
school has been pretty much miserable and ineffective for her. So my household awaits with great
anticipation. The news that we can have our door to vaccinate when Pfizer is authorized,
but I can't help wonder, will the vaccine be sufficiently effective for people with
down syndrome? Or is it likely that my family should expect that the vaccine will not offer our
daughter substantial protection? I suspect there's scant empirical evidence. But what might you
predict based on your knowledge of the immune system of folks with trisomy 21?
Yeah, no, this, this is a great question. And we are starting to expand from just the, oh,
how does this group of 30,000 people respond to looking at some of these other populations?
And we discussed the last time about people with transplant, people with other immune issues.
Now, a couple of things I'm going to say, I'm going to say I am actually quite optimistic
from what we know about these vaccines and what we know about the immune system,
that an individual down syndrome will get excellent. I'm going to say excellent. And
adolescent with with down syndrome should get excellent response. We saw in the trial
of adolescents 100% protection against even a positive PCR test with Pfizer. And that's pretty
amazing. Let's say that you drop that down to 90%. That's still really impressive. And if it's not
a negative PCR test, is it going to at least be, should there be a positive PCR is lower level?
So I actually, I would optimistically say I would go ahead, I would get that vaccine.
The efficacy looks really impressive. So even if it's a little bit reduced in
some with down syndrome, because of the issues there, we have a lot of margin of reduction here.
Mike in South Jersey writes, the day after receiving the second dose of Pfizer vaccine,
I developed an irregular heartbeat. I have had symptoms the past six days,
which tend to be worse at rest. I have yet to determine if I also have myocarditis after going
to my primary care physician and cardiologist. I was surprised to learn that this is becoming
more and more common. Can you please discuss this issue? Do you have any idea what might be causing
it? I'm a 42 year old male who exercises regularly and eats healthy.
Yeah, so I think this is great. I want to try to put this in context.
Right now, we're getting to the point where what the majority of Americans have gotten,
at least majority of adult Americans have gotten at least one dose of vaccine.
So it's almost like in the history of every patient, like when their vaccines were done.
So it's pretty soon going to be uncommon that someone was not vaccinated. So do we see myocarditis?
Yes. Do we see myocarditis at a higher rate in people that are vaccinated? I'm not sure that's
true. I'm speaking to one of my cardiologist colleagues today about some basically things
that are noticing. One was the issue, oh, this individual had low platelets. And so in their
mind, they had made a connection. This is being actively looked into, particularly with the Pfizer
vaccine, for instance, do people who get the Pfizer vaccine have a higher incidence of really
anything, particularly myocarditis, arrhythmias. So far, we're not seeing that looking at the vaccine
reporting system, looking at all this robust tracking. We still see what we see. People get
vaccinated. They get bitten by dogs. They get bitten by cats. They get in car crashes. They
have arrhythmias. They basically, all the things that we see, we still see. And it's not clear
that the myocarditis, the arrhythmias, are actually at a higher level. So certainly that
doctor will say, boy, of the last so many people I saw, 60% of them had been vaccinated. But you
know what? 60% of all people have been vaccinated. So it's sort of tricky to actually look at what
you're seeing and then really use a robust system to determine whether or not there's any causal
link here. That is COVID-19 clinical update number 63 with Dr. Daniel Griffin. Thank you, Daniel.
Oh, thank you so much. And everyone be safe.
