This week in virology, the podcast about viruses, the kind that make you sick.
From MicroTV, this is Twiv, this week in virology. Episode 761 recorded on May 27, 2021.
I'm Vincent Rack and Yellow, and you're listening to the podcast all about viruses.
Joining me today from New York, Daniel Griffin. Hello, everyone.
Here we are, Daniel, in the midst of a pandemic, and people are arguing about whether the virus
came from a lab or not. Is this crazy? Well, you know what? You got it, like you got to watch
the subtleties, Vincent. You know, initially it was whether or not this was created in a lab.
That's right.
Now they're like, well, if it just had anything at all to do with the lab, we're going to take
that as a win. I don't get it. I really don't get it.
Yeah, well, yeah, I do, right. And I think, you know, everyone should listen to the most recent
Twiv, which I truly enjoyed, where Peter Dashnek and crew, you know, basically the actual
investigators who went there spoke for over an hour. And real, I thought that was a great
episode, because right, so many of these headlines are out there, and you find those secret stuff
we can't share with you. And then you find out the secret stuff is what we found out that during
the cold and flu season, there were a few people at a large institute that had respiratory symptoms.
Oh, my Lord, that confirms it. And by the way, you know, as Peter said, would you tell us who they
are? We could go see if that was due to COVID. We can't tell you who those three people were.
I mean, come on, it's, yeah, when you mix science and politics, what do you get Vincent?
Politics, I love that. I thought that was great. Yeah, that was a great line.
But of course, clinical, clinical medicine is immune from politics, right, Daniel?
Oh, you know, you know, the really tough thing is nothing is immune from politics. And it's,
it's all intermeshed. So sometimes it's really interesting when people say, oh, stay away from
politics. It's, it's hard in medicine, right? Because public health is always directly tied
in with politics. So, but all right, let's, let's try to avoid politics as much as we can. Okay.
So, actually, boy, and then of course, here's my quotation, never, ever depend on governments
or institutions to solve any major problems. All social change comes from the passion of
individuals. And that was Margaret Mead, her usual apolitical self. And I think she's actually
another one of those really tremendous individuals that my dad had the opportunity to get a chance
to meet and talk with. So, very jealous that he's, he had this opportunity. But all right,
let me let me give you a little bit of an update on what's going on here in New York. And what
I'm going to try to do is I'm going to intersperse some of the stories because I am still admitting
patients with COVID to the hospitals. But clearly, the numbers are lower. These individuals are,
as we're seeing across the country, they're the unvaccinated. That's who gets sick with COVID.
I mean, the vaccinations are incredibly powerful, right? We've quoted numbers,
Rich was trying to do the math. Your chance of dying of COVID after a vaccine is one in 500,000.
So, pretty, pretty tremendous. So, I will sort of say things are going in the right direction
here in New York in so many ways. But I'm going to throw little clinical vignettes, little stories,
little experiences that I'm having here that I think put this into context. So, I will start
off with children and COVID. And by the time this dropped, I'll have been on the air Friday morning,
channel 12, again, talking about a lot of the issues that have come up, a lot of the science,
and a lot of how this is being translated. So, this is kind of quickly changing. So,
May 19th, we had updated guidance here in New York State. And we had the executive order,
right? These are executive orders, which are law, new guidance for health and safety measures at
childcare, day camp, and overnight camp programs as New York proceeds with strategic reopening.
So, I want to put this into context, as I have done before, some sort of repeating here,
is the CDC gives us the science-based guidance. They try to interpret the science and translate
that into what might affect how we comport ourselves. But ultimately, at the state level,
our governors give us the rules that we have to live by. And I applaud all the clinicians
and other health care professionals that I know are donating their time to help guide everyone
through this. And fortunately, I'm finding as someone that gives advice to a lot of these places,
that the staff is getting really savvy. They're really starting to get the science. I mean,
they've been educated up, which is fantastic. There's also a lot of different associations that
camps and restaurants and all these childcare facilities rely on. And those associations
really have tremendous people that are taking the time and getting up on the science. So,
with that said, what was that guidance? I'm going to tell you ahead of time,
we got more guidance on the 24th, so that's going to get layered onto this. So,
what was the initial guidance on the 19th? Facilities and programs must collect COVID-19
vaccination status and documentation for all staff and children. So, that's actually kind of
heavy, right? That's a little bit of a thing. We've talked about, you know, HIPAA's coming up
periodically. But what is really the issue here? An employer, a person running with these programs
can ask, you know, the HIPAA thing would be a person may say I'd rather not answer that question,
but this is an interesting challenge. They're actually saying you must collect the vaccination
status. So, that's going to be an interesting challenge into this summer. The next mandatory
daily health screening practices of staff and visitors, including daily temperature checks.
And that is a little bit of an issue. And we've discussed this at sort of a national level,
is how much do those actually help? And then particularly those daily temperature checks,
because we've got to start thinking of COVID as the flu. A lot of individuals, particularly during
those first few days when they're shedding a lot, they do not have fevers, right? So,
there's a little bit of an issue here, but that's your state, right? This will be different
everyone else's state and country. Facility and programs need to notify the state and local
health department immediately upon being informed of any positive COVID-19 test by a staff member
or child at their site. Each site must implement a property specific capacity limitation
for children and campers that ensures appropriate social distancing. Staff who are not fully
vaccinated must maintain a distance of at least six feet from other unvaccinated staff, right? So,
that sort of requires you to know, unless you're going to make everyone distance,
children and campers over the age of two and staff who are not fully vaccinated must wear
face coverings, except when eating, drinking, showering, swimming, or sleeping, resting.
Take a deep breath. And now, May 24th, we get an update and it hits right on some of these issues.
Suddenly, it has changed. And I say suddenly, not to be judgmental, but the guidance is moving
forward. Responsible parties should encourage children, campers aged to an older who are not fully
vaccinated to wear face covering. Young children campers, those that are not in kindergarten,
do not need to wear face coverings when they're in a child's care or a day camp program facility
or area, right? So, it's getting a little bit different here. Children campers are not required
to wear a face covering when utilizing the outdoor space that belongs to and or is exclusively
used by the child care or a day camp program and then restricting saying face coverings must be
worn by individuals who are not fully vaccinated during transportation, right? So, they're actually,
at least here in New York State, if you read this guidance closely, it's not that easy to read that
closely. But if the kids are there, if they're in that camp setting, in that child care setting,
they do not necessarily need to have mass on when they're outdoors. And I think this evolves
from some of the science we have talked about. Outdoors is a very safe place relative to other
places. A proper translation of the research, I think, is that transmission is less than 1% in
the outdoor area. So, outdoors in the summer, dropping prevalence, particularly here in New
York State, these are all going to be really positive for our kids. I don't go that much into,
I did go into a little in previous ones, but there is a mental health and all kinds of other
challenges to having kids wear masks, having all these restrictions that our kids have
gone through. And I always get angry emails when I talk about the fact that we have learned a lot
about how we can actually get kids in these different settings, in camp, in school,
how we can do it safely. Maybe sometimes the rates of infection are even lower when kids are allowed
to go to school with the proper mitigation methods. Well, let's talk about that. There was a recent
preprint that got a lot of headlines. So, let's go through this because I think it was misinterpreted
a little bit. So, I want to actually go through what it actually said if one takes the time. So,
this was the preprint COVID-19 mitigation practices and COVID-19 rates in schools report on data from
Florida, New York, and Massachusetts. So, this was recently posted and the authors used data
from the COVID-19 school response dashboard. Now, what is that? Now, this is a resource created
with the organizing partners, the AASA, the school superintendents Association, the National Association
of Secondary School Principles, the National Association of Elementary School Principles,
Brown University Professor of Economics, Emily Oster. And this can actually be accessed. This is
COVIDschool-board.com. You can go there and look at the data. But as the authors point out,
they only looked at data from Florida, New York, and Massachusetts because
as they in the COVID school dashboard report, this resource only contains consistent data for a
limited number of states. There's actually a couple more that the COVID school dashboard has added.
I will say that this paper will be much better after peer review. Despite several limitations,
the authors point out what I agree, basically finding that there does seem to be a lower rate
of COVID-19 for students being in school, suggesting that actually kids may be safer in school and
then not in school. And this has been sort of an interesting touchy for when I discuss this with
parent groups. You know, who would I trust with my children? Let's say the Port Washington School
District or my wife, it would be my wife. But there is a dynamic that happens socially when our
kids are isolated. We're trying to figure out ways for them to socially interact. And it is,
it is hard and the school can can do it in such a way with actually get a degree of social
interaction. Now, one of the things that was taken away from this, I will point out,
is people said this study failed to show an impact of masking. So they only actually had
mask mandate information for Florida. And I'll qualify that all they had was whether or not there
was a mandate in place. There was no on the ground checking to see whether masks were being worn,
not worn. There did seem to be a little bit of a signal to the teachers wearing masks.
But I'm going to sort of leave it at that point, because we're going to hit some other, I think,
data where we actually look at when they looked at masks ventilation, where they've actually shown
that that is associated with a reduction in transmission. Pre-exposure transmission period,
I really liked another early release that came out in the MMWR. And this was sort of shadowing this
mask use and ventilation improvements to reduce COVID-19 incidents in elementary schools. And this
was Georgia November 16 to December 11. Now, the authors reported that COVID-19 incidents was 37%
lower in schools that required teachers and staff members to use masks and 39% lower in schools
that improved ventilation. And the ventilation strategies associated with lower school incidents
included dilution methods alone. That was 35% lower incidence. Or in combination with filtration
methods, that was a 48% lower incidence. So using things like those HEPA filtration systems. So
in this study, the authors used data from the Georgia kindergarten through grade five K through
five schools that opened for in-person learning during fall 2020. And they reported on huge study
169 K through five schools that participated in a survey on prevention strategies and recorded
COVID-19 cases during November 16 to December 11, 2020. And so the Georgia Department of Public
Health required all Georgia schools to submit weekly data on the aggregate number of COVID-19
cases among students and staff members. And this analysis was based on 1,321 public K through five
schools, 140 private K through five schools. And prevention strategies assessed included mask
requirements for teachers, staff members, students, ventilation improvements, physical distancing of
desks greater than six feet apart. Barriers on student desks, class size, number of students
in a classroom, cohort size of small groups of students who stay together throughout the day
during in-person learning, and number and locations of available hand washing stations.
And I know the paper focused on masks and ventilation as far as their conclusions.
But there's really interesting information if you go through the paper in detail,
look at the tables. And in addition to sort of the conclusions, I point out a couple of things
that I found interesting. The higher the county COVID-19 incidents, the higher the number of
students that tested positive. So I think that's again what we've seen the community incidents
actually ties in very directly with school incidents. And they also didn't really see an
impact of that separating the desk by six feet. Basically the schools that did it and those that
did not had the same incidents of COVID-19 per 500 students. So again, we've talked a little bit
about do you need six feet? Can you get them three feet? Is that getting what you need?
And we're seeing masks, three feet ventilation improvements, all these other testing, all these
other strategies really are showing us that schools could be a really safe place even for
unvaccinated children. And now that we're vaccinating adolescents, now that our rates are dropping,
I think the sciences is supporting a lot of our progress in this area with getting kids
back to schools, back to social interactions and camps. All right, testing never miss an
opportunity to test. You know, I'm beginning to think that everyone should just subscribe to
the CDC morbidity and mortality weekly reports. And I will say I also listened to there. They
have a great weekly podcast if you don't like to read. You could do both. I do both. But there
was another release in the MMWR. This one was entitled COVID-19 testing to sustain in-person
instruction and extracurricular activities in high schools, Utah, November 2020 to March 2021.
Now, for context, COVID-19 was associated with the cessation of kindergarten through grade 12
in-person instruction and extracurricular activities. So most of us can agree that this
had negative social, emotional, and educational consequences for our children. So what were they
doing here? The authors reported on two high school COVID-19 testing programs that were created to
sustain in-person instruction and allow for extracurricular activities. During November 30, 2020,
through March 2021, among 59,552 students who received testing 3.2% had a positive result.
So what they went through doing these programs, these programs that they put in place
facilitated the completion of approximately 95% of the high school extracurricular competition
events and saved an estimated 109,752 in-person instruction student days. So the authors were
suggesting that school-based COVID-19 testing should be considered part of a comprehensive
prevention strategy to identify SARS-CoV-2 infections in schools and sustain in-person
instruction and extracurricular activities. So what did they actually do? Well, the schools
implemented these two high school testing programs. Test to play and test to stay. So I love how
catchy these are. So test to play. This was where there was testing every 14 days mandated for
participation in extracurricular activities. That doesn't seem very often, right, every 14 days.
Test to stay involved school-wide testing to continue in-person instruction as an alternative
to transitioning to remote instruction if a school crossed a defined outbreak threshold,
right? So these are areas where we're starting to see increased incidence. They're jumping in
with these testing strategies during November 30, 2020 through March 20, 2021. As I mentioned,
59,552 students were tested through these programs at over 100 of Utah's public schools.
They implemented rapid antigen testing. Now with rising rates of COVID-19 in Utah,
a November 9 statewide COVID-19 restrictions were ordered, and part of that was a cessation of
extracurricular activities. That was when test to play was introduced. And in December 2020,
test to stay was piloted at two high schools. And beginning January 4, 2021, schools crossing the
outbake threshold could choose to implement test to stay as an alternative to transitioning to
remote instruction. And a number of the schools jumped in. They took advantage of this. They
were given free test kits, training, testing assistance, help implementing these programs,
and the authors point out with their conclusions that this approach can serve as a framework for
other schools wanting to have kids back in school for sustained in-person instruction
and continued extracurricular activities. Active vaccination. Never miss an opportunity
to vaccinate. And I also say vaccines are how this pandemic ends. And I'm going to start here
with with the story. I actually every so often get upset. I may seem calm and level headed all
times because sometimes things get me a little bit upset. And this was a patient of mine taking
care of her several times in the past. I've known her for a while. She is homebound. So she was
homebound. And she was very excited to get vaccinated. But her primary care physician was
not aware of how to access one of these programs to get a homebound person vaccinated.
And this frustrates me because I will say a lot of people are jumping into this space and trying
to help actually north well. One of our large healthcare systems here is actually set up a
program where physicians can reach out, connect their patient, and personnel will go out to the
residents and vaccinate these homebound people in their home. So these exist. These programs
exist. So if you are taking care of patients, if you have someone you care about who's homebound,
who can't get to a vaccine site, start making those calls. Let's let's get these people vaccinated.
But so while she's waiting, unable to get vaccinated, she is homebound. And she is being taken care of
by a home health aide who happens to be an anti-vaxxer. The home healthcare aid gets COVID. The home
healthcare aid infects our patient, my patient. And now my patient who is unvaccinated is in the
hospital on steroids, on remdesivir, on anticoagulation, on oxygen. And just this very much could be
avoided. The other thing that didn't happen there is after she was exposed, started to get sick,
monoclonals were not given. And I think I pointed out too, monoclonals, we have programs for
delivering those in the home for homebound individuals as well. So she missed her opportunity to get
vaccinated. She missed her opportunity to get monoclonals. And you know, it's upsetting to me.
I understand that people want to make decisions. But when you make a decision,
that ends up putting someone else in the hospital that I find very difficult.
On May 25th, we heard from Moderna with the press release. Moderna announces teen COVE
study of its COVID-19 vaccine in adolescence meets primary endpoint. And they plan to submit data
to regulators in early June to expand the EUA down to 12 years of age for Moderna. Now,
this was a phase two, three study in 3,732 adolescent participants aged 12 to less than 18.
And they were randomized two to one to 200 microgram doses of the mRNA 1273,
so the Moderna vaccine or placebo. And the primary endpoint was non-inferior immunogenicity versus
the phase three adult study comparator that was met after two doses. No cases of COVID-19 were
observed in the vaccine group using the case definition from the adult phase three COVE study.
Compared to four cases in the placebo group, resulting in a vaccine efficacy of 100% starting
14 days after the second dose. Keep in mind those numbers, right? So you want to hang your hat on
that. Because the incidence rate of COVID-19 is lower in adolescence, a secondary case definition
based on CDC definition of COVID-19 was also evaluated to include cases presenting with milder
symptoms. So using the CDC definition, which requires only one symptom and a nasopharyngeal
swab or saliva sample positive for SARS-CoV-2 by RT-PCR, we got a vaccine efficacy of 93%
after the first dose. The Moderna vaccine was well tolerated with really the same safety profile
that we saw in adults. That was really positive, kind of nice. We're going to have some more options
eventually. The FDA also, this is, this actually is pretty big. They authorized a longer time for
refrigerator storage of the THOD Pfizer BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine prior to dilution. So if people
have ever worked with this, these come in a non-deluded vial and then you have a little normal
saline that you use to dilute that before you administer it. You can take that out of the deep
freeze thermal shippers. You can leave it in a normal refrigerator for up to a month. I don't
know if that's 30 or 31 days or 28 if it's February, but no, it's 30 days in a normal medical refrigerator.
And there's now an updated fact sheet with this modification. One still needs to get that into
arms within six hours after you dilute that. So that is a little different than Moderna. Once
you puncture a Moderna vial, you've got 12 hours. The other thing in here is that normally you had
to order over 1,000 of the Pfizer BioNTech vaccines and this big thermal shipper. You can order
half thermal shippers, so about 600 or so. And also we have programs I think I mentioned here in
New York where you can actually partner with other organizations and get as little as 40 or 50
doses where someone else is taking another 40 or 50 doses and a number of practices are working
together so that we can start offering this in the pediatrician's office in more of the primary
care setting offices. So this is really huge for helping us improve access. The period of
detectable viral replication or the viral symptom phase, as I like to say, the time for monitoring
and monoclonals and NSAIDs are fine for symptomatic relief. I'm going to tell another story here and
this was kind of an interesting story. I see a lot of individuals who are suffering from long
COVID and this person was actually interesting. I don't see a lot of this, but this was an individual
who got sick in early January. This was an older man, late 70s, a number of health problems.
And he actually got monoclonals, maybe a little bit late, about day eight, but he actually went on
to develop long COVID. And so I first saw this gentleman about seven weeks ago. And at that
point in time, we talked and I usually tell people, hey, why don't we go ahead and let's try
see if vaccination will have any impact here. It was really, I have to say, this was very pleasant
Tuesday in the afternoon in the office, because this gentleman got on and just basically said,
Dr. Griffin, it was like switching in the lights. I am completely better. I have no more symptoms.
Thank you. We don't need to see each other anymore. So sort of two issues there. One was actually,
I do not often see people with long COVID after monoclonals. I have actually seen several just
to and we're analyzing our data to see what the incidence is or if there is an impact on long
COVID to getting monoclonals. So we'll have that data, hopefully, to share real data, not just this
story, but also, again, really nice to see another individual who had this really nice timing of
recovery after vaccination. All right, another monoclonal option just got EUA this week, right?
So more options here. GSK and VIR Biotech announced Sotra VIMAB. So this is VIR7831.
I'm not sure their name is easier to say than VIR7831, but Sotra VIMAB received EUA
for treatment of mild to moderate COVID-19 in high-risk adults and pediatric patients.
This is actually based on data that we've discussed before. This was the common trial data
with an 85% reduction in risk of hospitalization or death. And I actually want to point out,
and this is in the EUA in the announcement, is that Sotra VIMAB maintains activity against all
known variants of concern, including that triple mutant variant from India. So that is nice to say.
Monoclonal access is actually now expanded, and the wording now is,
healthcare providers can now consider the benefit risk for an individual patient
using the fact sheet for healthcare providers and the CDC website as guidance. So now we're
saying you can look at giving this to your high-risk patients. You don't necessarily have to check
that box. We talked about BMI of 25. So maybe it's a BMI of 24. You're going to use your
judgment there. Maybe they're not 65, but they're 63. Is that close enough? So we're seeing a little
bit of realization that there's no reason to let these products sit on the shelf, considering
how incredibly effective they can be and how safe they have been. But remember, the monoclonal
cocktails are not authorized for and probably are not a benefit for people who have missed the window
and are already hospitalized due to COVID-19, who require oxygen therapy, because they've gotten
into that early inflammatory phase, or who have chronic oxygen needs and now have an increased
requirement. And, you know, and this is in, is that monoclonals actually may be associated with
worse clinical outcomes when administered to hospitalized patients with COVID-19 requiring
high-flow oxygen or mechanical ventilation. So we go from a window of opportunity to a time
when that is closed, actually a time when we may be harming our patients by using these. So
this isn't something that you want to just ban for your relative. You need an educated clinician
helping make the decision about whether or not this is going to be a life-saving, a beneficial,
or even an harmful intervention. One of the management decisions that I often struggle
with during this time, and I'm still going to say after this, I still struggle with this,
is, is there a role for aspirin in the outpatient setting? And there was an article,
active prescription of low dose aspirin during or prior to hospitalization and mortality in COVID-19,
a systematic review and meta-analysis of adjusted effect estimates. And this was published in the
International Journal of Infectious Diseases. And I actually spent a lot of time analyzing this
paper to really see if I could come away with a conclusion. So this was a meta-analysis,
which our listeners may recall is what you, when you get, you take a whole bunch of studies and
you stack them on one on top of another and maybe each study isn't so great. But when you get them
all together, you reach a certain height and they miraculously turn into gold. That is not the case.
The authors report too have found six eligible studies comprising 13,993 patients, right? So that,
that's not an impressive. That's, oh, this is great. But let's be fair. When you actually start
reading the article, you realize that 12,600 of those patients come from just one study. And then
the other studies all have only between 48 and 638 patients, really making this a sort of a
re-analysis of that huge study. And what was that huge study with the 12,600? That was
association of mortality and aspirin prescriptions for COVID-19 patients at the Veterans Health
Administration that was published back in February. And if you look at that, what did they do? They
did not actually look in that study at people getting aspirin for the treatment of COVID.
They just looked at veterans in a database and said, who was on aspirin prior to getting COVID?
And then they looked at their outcomes versus the outcomes of those people who were not prescribed
aspirin. So I'm really left without any certainty regarding a benefit or even harm with routine use
of aspirin. So I'm going to leave this in sort of the clinical judgment realm. No real good science
helping us. And we do. We need good science helping us with aspirin and a platelet agents
and a coagulation. All right. So now we're going to get to the tail. We're going to jump way ahead
here to the tail. I don't feel like I have any other new things to jump in on some of these other
areas. But we have information out of the UK on children and COVID. And I think this is important
to sort of get things in context. So one of the things we now think we have a sense is the case,
or I'll say the infection hospitalization rate for children. We don't really know the case or
the actual infection. We have the cases. But let's look at this study. So illustration and
symptom profile in a large cohort of symptomatic UK school aged children tested for SARS-CoV-2.
This was posted in a preprint. So it hasn't gone through peer review yet. And the authors here
reported on 1,734 children with a positive SARS-CoV-2 test result. And they had information on
illness duration within the study timeframe. Right? Because they wanted to be able to ask the
question of these kids who get COVID, how long are they sick? We got a little bit of information
on symptoms. The most common symptom was headache. That was 62.2%. Fatigue was a little over half,
55%. And the median acute illness duration was six days. But that was a little bit different.
Seven days if you were older, five days if you were younger, as far as symptom duration. So
here, what are we looking at? We're looking at what kids went on to have prolonged symptoms.
4.4% of the children had an illness duration of greater than 28 days.
More commonly experienced by the older versus the younger children. So if you looked at the
older, it was actually about 5.1%. And the younger about 3.1%. So sort of a trend there.
The common symptoms experienced by these children for this prolonged period of time past 28 days
was 84%. 80% of them were reporting headaches. 80% of them were reporting a lack of ability to
smell. When we got out to greater than 56 days, 1.8% of the children were still experiencing symptoms.
So I'm going to avoid using words like only or just. But this gives us a sense of the risk here.
Kids got COVID. About 4.4% of them were still having symptoms about a month out. Once we got
to about two months out, 1.8% of the kids had continued symptoms. So this is suggesting that
the incidence of long COVID or post cutes quality of COVID is lower in children than adults. The
symptom burden in these children didn't increase. They did not get worse. And as we saw as we went
from 30 days to 60 days, we actually had a lower percentage of kids continuing to report
any symptoms there. I'm going to finish with one. Actually, this was sort of a hot off the
press story that I thought was interesting. And I'll just leave this for people to speculate on.
I have a patient still taking care of her in the hospital. And she got sick back in December.
And she has a number of autoimmune diseases. She's on some immunosuppressive medicine. It had been
quite a period of time. And about a month ago, we decided to repeat her PCR this time quantitatively,
right? Because we've been positive PCR forever. And we really been looking at the literature. And
a lot of the suggestions, boy, once you get past about 10, maybe 20 days, you have a positive PCR,
but it's really just low level. And in this individual, the PCR came back in the 20s, actually
translating into about 45 million RNA copies, quite surprised at how high this was. We discussed
with her and her sons that we really had no evidence-based interventions to offer them.
And we then moved on to a discussion of what are we going to do in the future so that this
woman doesn't get reinfected, right? Not clear that she's mounting any great response.
And so they were concerned about vaccination. She had had some prior issues with vaccination.
And we decided, as a joint shared decision-making, that the safest place to go ahead with vaccination
was while she was still in the hospital before she was discharged. She received the J and J vaccine,
which really tolerated without any event. And today was about 10 days after that dose.
And we've been trying to look at our options for sending this woman to different facilities.
And we repeated the PCR today, and it was negative. Very exciting. We're going to repeat it again
tomorrow. So sort of interesting. One of those observations, is it true that that's related
to the vaccine? Do we just finally get to that threshold? But for me, very encouraging. After
this very long odyssey, this woman is potentially going to leave the hospital vaccinated.
I will leave it there and just remind everyone, drop what you're doing if you love what we do.
Or if you love what FIMRIC does, we are still continuing to help support Foundation International
Medical Relief of Children. And this is really a tremendous organization that I've worked with
for years with sites throughout the world, really making a difference in so many people's lives.
And really the mission that I love, they go to these places, they ask the people there,
what do you need? What can we do to help you? And then they work with those communities to try to
meet those needs. So go to parasites without borders.com and help us support them and continue our work.
Time for some emails for Daniel. If you want to send one in, Daniel at microbe.tv. Bill writes,
my 13 year old son just received Gardasil vaccine. And with the approval for COVID for kids,
we'd like to get him vaccinated ASAP. Is there a waiting period we should adhere to between different
viral vaccinations? So that has been that two week waiting period has been removed.
Early on, I always said, don't ever let that stand in the way. Try to sort of space things
two weeks out. But now they basically said, no, we have enough of an observation. We have enough
science here. We know what we see with different vaccines. Go ahead, get that COVID-19 vaccine
as soon as possible. Peter Wright, I'm an anesthesiologist and dentist here in New York's
good neighbor, Toronto, Ontario. So I was thankful to have had AstraZeneca first vaccine nine weeks
ago, no sequela. I was diagnosed with polycythemia Vira three years ago, managed with ASA and every
other month phlebotomy, because I turned 65 in late March protocols or be or to begin hydroxyurea
500 milligrams. I've been delaying starting my hydroxyurea till after I have my second vaccination,
thinking it may probably compromise my immune response with all the changing data regarding
from thrombotic events after the first AstraZeneca dose and preliminary reports regarding the
incident after second dose. Interested in your thoughts regarding the second vaccine and the timing
of hydroxyurea? Yeah, I mean, I I'm not sure that I sort of thinking through the immunology would be
concerned, but but that's not really the way we want to approach this. If you can go ahead and get
that vaccine, if it's fine to delay a little bit before you switch over the hydroxyurea,
that would probably be my personal preference. All right. And finally, from Jackie, I'm a pediatric
nurse practitioner. I do medical administration work for a large federally qualified health
center in Philadelphia. My colleagues and I love your show. So Jackie has a bunch of questions.
Let's see how many we can get through. Now that we have J&J, now that we know J&J has caused about
28ish cases of blood clots, could you help us compare risks to the background in the general
population, people with COVID and J&J recipients? Yes, I think that's an excellent question.
You know, when they went through the analysis of J&J and now, and I think this is evidence,
again, we have a really robust vaccine monitoring system. So we had the initial numbers we've now
seen, as mentioned, a number of other cases in a slightly broader demographic. The risk is still
low. It is still, you know, less than one in 100,000, you know, people is at one in 100,000,
one in 500,000, there are probably a little subtleties on teasing that out. But the risk
is incredibly rare. We've talked about that maybe being lower if we avoid women under the age of
50, right? So then maybe we get into a lower risk here. But you compare that to the risk of getting
COVID, the risk of complications if you get COVID. And that's what I tell people. I had a very
interesting rather long discussion with a patient who's actually a patient who had an
adolescent son, who had a developmental disorder. And, you know, and I said to her, listen,
there's a, you're making a decision either way, you're either deciding to get the vaccine,
or you're deciding to take the risk of getting COVID and the complications that come with that.
Boy, the risk of any vaccine is so much smaller than the risk of getting COVID during a pandemic
and all the complications that come from that.
Jackie, second question is about guidance for 12 to 15 year old group with regard to vaccination.
But that's answered, right? Both mRNA vaccines are authorized now for that age.
Just so currently just Pfizer, but Moderna is in the works for expansion. So they requested
every question. Yeah. So she should go should be any day now then, right?
You know, there's a period of when, when you request, they have to wait 15 days,
and then the FDA can grant it. So we're ending May, it'll be in June.
All right, could you talk a little bit about giving routine vaccinations along with COVID?
When will that be approved? I'd love to do 16 year old checkups over the summer. Give
that meningitis number two shot along with a stray HEP or an HPV plus COVID.
That would be my ideal universe as a pediatric nurse practitioner.
Well, we live in that world right here already, and we've lifted that space in
them apart. Go ahead. If you can get them in, if this is an opportunity to get those vaccines
into arms, you do not need to space them apart. This is absolutely fine.
And finally, could you talk a little bit more about monoclonal therapy? How to get
patients access? I know this is a mundane concern. Transportation is an issue for many patients,
and now you have a symptomatic patient. You've told the isolate how you're going to get them from
their home to the infusion center. How about therapy for children? Yeah, so this, this is,
as I said, we've expanded this a little bit out, but still it's, it's limited, right below 18.
It's probably 18 enough that really is broadened. There are certain number of indications for the
under-17 crowd. We have programs where you can get these in the home. What's going to be really
exciting and what a lot of people are working on is IM and sub-Q injection. So what can we do
right now? So right now, a lot of times it might be actually going, I'll say here in the New York
area, the Catholic health system do a great job of basically to show up at an ER and you can get
access. Northwell Health, one of our largest health systems here, actually has, you know,
the physician goes online, fills out some forms, and yes, the person would have to go to a tent
outside of an ER. For certain individuals, you can call the number and you can actually get
set up in home infusion, but we're hoping this is going to be something where, you know, a call
can go out to a pharmacy, something can be delivered to the home. One of the challenges still is that
rare, right, one in several thousand anaphylactic reactions. So if you're going to do it in the home,
you're probably still going to want someone who can be there to, you know, administer an EpiPen
and get Benadryl, you know, treat an anaphylactic reaction. That's COVID-19 clinical update number
64 with Dr. Daniel Griffin. Thank you, Daniel. Oh, thank you so much and everyone be safe.
