This week in virology, the podcast about viruses, the kind that make you sick.
From Microbe TV, this is Twiv, this week in virology, episode 764, recorded on June 3, 2021.
I'm Vincent Rackeniello, and you're listening to the podcast all about viruses. Joining me
today from New York, Daniel Griffin. Hello, everyone.
Well, Daniel, last time I think I asked you when the pandemic would be over. Now I understand Tony
Fauci says July. How about that? Oh, yeah. I can't, I don't believe it because we're not going to
hit the level of immunity. What do you think? I worry about that question for several reasons.
One, I've sort of been, every so often I go on social media. And when that question has been
bantered about somebody replied back with which pandemic, right, pointing out that the age and
the age pandemic is going strong. And then there really is, and I think that really goes in line
with the fact that there's this real narrow focus people might have the pandemic over in New York
City. Is it over in the United States? Is it over in the world? And well, the HIV AIDS pandemic
is not over in New York City or nor the world. I do think, and we'll talk about this, that rates
are going to get pretty darn low in July and August here in the US. But if you look around
the world, this pandemic is far from over. That's right, absolutely.
All right, let's start with our quotation. I was thinking of you when I picked out this
quotation, Vincent. If you set out to be liked, you would be prepared to compromise on anything
at any time, and you would achieve nothing. And that was Margaret Thatcher. I've just noticed a
lot of the recent twibs have discussed the viral origins, and I'm sure you're getting
wonderful, loving emails in response from all the people that agree with you. And even the ones
that don't, I'm sure it's very civil discourse. Right, you got it.
So all right, let's things here in the US said, you know, I'm going to say, I'm going to use the
word pessimism and optimism here. But I always prefer the truth, right? People say, Oh, I just
want to look on the bright. I want to actually know the truth. And there were a lot of people
with predictive models about where we were headed and one of the predictive models or the
pessimistic model. This was June 1st, the article association of simulated COVID-19
vaccination and non-pharmaceutical interventions with infections, hospitalizations, and mortality.
That was published in JAMA Network Open. And here the authors report on a number of simulations
that they were suggesting supported the idea that if we removed mass all these non-pharmaceutical
interventions while the vaccines were being distributed, before we got to a high level,
that we would see substantial increases in infections, hospitalizations, deaths, we're not
seeing that. You know, what we're actually seeing across the country is that we actually have
continued vaccine update. We're really seeing an exponential drop in cases. And one of the things
that I've actually talked to people a lot about because people ask me, what did you think
about when the CDC made that comment about people with full vaccination don't necessarily have to
wear masks in a lot of situations. And it was interesting to watch because the number of people
being vaccinated, the number of people scheduling to get vaccinated per day was actually declining.
And if you actually look at that day, when Dr. Walensky came out with this announcement,
there actually was an uptick in the number of people going to the vaccine websites to schedule.
And then Anthony Fauci said, you know, sort of mused that boy, I wonder if this might actually
be an incentive. And there was another uptick in people visiting. And then the president tweeted,
and there was another uptick. So, you know, people like carrots, right, the chocolate-covered
carrot, the hey, you know, I may not believe in those things, but if I get a shot in the arm,
I'm allowed to take my mask off. All right, whatever. I'm, you know, I'm not that anti-getting
vaccinated, right? So, what we're seeing, and I think to echo this is on the ground here,
we are seeing a significant drop in the number of people testing positive. The other day, I think
Monday, it was in the 300s in the entire state. I did get, you know, an admission this morning
with a gentleman in his late 50s with the COVID. Unfortunately, there's a perception going with
the pandemic is ending. And so, this gentleman was seen nine days ago. He's a gentleman in his
late 50s. He has hypertension. And his doctor said, well, you got the COVID, but don't you worry
because the COVID's going away. The COVID you have is mild. We're not really seeing hospitalizations
or deaths anymore. And I want to point out, no, no, the COVID in him is the COVID in him.
COVID has not evolved into a less virulent pathogen. This person was not offered monoclonal
was really was offered nothing other than, you know,
pilot offers fever. Now he's in the hospital. He's on steroids. He's on remdesivir. He's on
blood thinners. He's on oxygen. So, yeah, though, just because it's getting better all over,
that individual patient is still at risk of bad outcomes. And we're still seeing hundreds of people
dying per day. So, as Rosie as we like to paint the picture, people are still dying every day.
Hundreds of people are still dying here every day in the US. And around the world, the picture
particularly in lots of areas Southeast Asia, South America, it's really not great. So,
was he vaccinated? He was not. And I asked him that. And he rolled his eyes and said,
and I'm regretting that decision. All right. Yeah, you know, if he could go back in time,
I think he would have, you know, made a different decision. And that's what he told me.
I did start off. I gave him a hard time, right? Because he's not vaccinating. I said,
what are you doing? You know, it's like we're in bell bottoms. This is not what you're supposed
to be doing these days showing up with COVID. And he's, I know. So, hopefully he's going to do well.
Fingers crossed. We'll provide him with all the care we can. And hopefully then he will discuss
to other members of his tribe the benefit of vaccine versus the five day hospital stay,
hopefully five day hospital stay only. All right. Children and COVID, as I like to say,
children are at low risk, but they're not at no risk. And CDC updated the camp guidance again
May 28. So what, what is new? Well, far as masks staff and campers who are fully vaccinated do not
need to wear masks at camp, except where they're required by local legislature. Although fully
vaccinated people do not need to wear masks, camps can be supportive of staff or campers who choose
to continue to wear a mask, right? I'm still that guy at the gym wearing a mask. So hopefully people
continue to support that physical distancing. Again, they're doubling down on this saying,
you know, people are fully vaccinated, except as indicated, physical distancing is not necessary
for campers and staff who are fully vaccinated. Hand hygiene respiratory etiquette. Apparently,
now Vincent, you no longer have to wash your hands or cover your cough now, just joking, looking
there. You should continue. This is like COVID independent, but you should continue to have health
promoting behaviors such as hand hygiene, respiratory etiquette. Remember, respiratory etiquette is
not coughing into your hand and offering it to your neighbor for a firm hand embrace. They do
weigh in a little bit on cleaning, improving ventilation, maintaining healthy facilities.
You know, they still want you to continue cleaning, disinfecting, and you know, continue to hammer
on ventilation recommendations. You know, and if it's a high touch surface, you know, keep
cleaning. And I think that's good practice over time, but they do say improve, maintain,
improve ventilation, open those windows, use the air filters, turn on the fans,
all those things that we've learned can be of benefit. And they do actually weigh in on testing.
So people who are fully vaccinated do not need to undergo routine COVID-19 screening testing.
And then they go in just a little more. If a person's fully vaccinated, they're exposed,
but they don't have symptoms, you do not need to keep testing them or quarantine or isolate them.
If they get infected, however, so they start showing symptoms, then you go ahead and you test
them because we do see breakthrough there. I'm wondering if Colombia is going to do away with
the testing on that, you know, that see you open application pretty soon. So I'm waiting, but I'm
really waiting to not wait online for the bathroom anymore, because we're only allowed one person at
a time in the bathrooms. That can be a challenge for for well, well, welcome to what the other
sex experience for many years, right? It's true. They always set up facilities. So that, yeah,
okay, we still have distancing and masking requirements here as well. You know, you can't
have more people in a lab that would not allow six feet of distance. You have to wear masks,
et cetera. So yeah, did you upload your vaccine card? I did. Yeah, there's no a vaccine requirement
at Columbia. That's right. Yeah, so testing never missed an opportunity to test, right? We still
see there being an important role for this in certain context, right? So this is modifying a
little. But what about serology testing? What about that other test? The FDA has actually
recommended that we do not check serologies. And there's actually an FDA posting on this. I'm
going to touch on this a few times because just by the way, physicians are not listening to that
nor our patients. So we'll get into that issue in different contexts. But what about those rapid
tests? You know, there's been this idea. And there was an event, I think in Washington that sort of,
well, a couple of things in Washington that maybe gave rapid antigen testing a bad name or some loss
of confidence. But there was an article same day, SARS-CoV-2 antigen test screening in an indoor
mass gathering live music event, a randomized control trial. And this was this article is
published in the Lancet Infectious Disease. And this was a randomized controlled open labeled trial.
So people knew they're getting tested to assess the effectiveness of a comprehensive
preventative intervention for a mass gathering indoor events is a live concert. So testing is
part of this comprehensive program. And what they did is they did same day screening of attendees
with an antigen based rapid test. They also face masks adequate air ventilation. And the whole goal
of this, right, is a lot of a lot of these venues were shut down. And it was really asking the
question, can we put together this program, which includes testing to allow these events to occur
in an acceptably safe manner. So these were adults aged 18 to 59 with a negative result. So you were
tested, you had a negative result. And this was a nasopharyngeal swab collected immediately. And
then if you were, if you're positive, you got to go home. But if you're negative, then you were
randomized either to attend the event, or I thought this was, or you get sent home, right? So they
got to randomize you. So this way, you're actually going to be in that control group to know if
whatever positivity is relative to this event or not. And then they actually also took these
specimens. And they did RTPCR. They did cell culture on Vero E6 cells. And what did they do?
They then eight days after the event, they collected another nasopharyngeal swab. They analyzed this
by rapid antigen by RTPCR. And they did a transcription mediated amplification test of TMA. So that's
that's a very sensitive PCR modality. And the primary outcome was the difference in the incidence
of the RTPCR based confirmed infection at eight days between the control group and those people
who were sent home. Well, so at baseline, let's say that we had 3% of people in the control group,
the people who were sent home, and 3% of the people in the experimental group were positive.
So there was no, no significant difference there. The RTPCR test was positive in one case in each
group. And the cell viral culture was negative in all cases. And I just want to point out what
I'm sort of pushing out here is that so even though you had a positive PCR test that you missed
with that rapid antigen test, there was no viral culture growth. This was below, we think, a level
of contagiousness. There was no, no contagiousness occurring at this concert. So eight days after the
event, less than 1% of the individuals in the control arm had a positive antigen or PCR test.
No one was found to be positive in the intervention group. So basically what they're sort of
reinforcing here is that this is another way of approaching these large gatherings. And I think
you couple this with a dropping incidence. And maybe this is why people are in certain ways saying
we're getting to the end of the pandemic in certain situations. Active vaccination never
miss an opportunity to vaccinate and vaccines are how this pandemic ends. Moderna has now
officially applied for the EUA expansion down to age 12. That was on June 1st. So we are expecting
an approval later this month. So that was announced by Moderna. That's going to help, right? And
people sort of, do we need, yeah, we need as many cylinders firing as possible. Pfizer is out there,
Pfizer, if anything, has a little more ease. You know, you can get it out there, can sit in a fridge
for a month. If you work with other groups, you can somehow deal with the fact that instead of
ordering 1,000, maybe only order about 600. But Moderna is a little more convenient to be completely
honest. It's also a little less user issue. I just relate some issues that I've gotten calls about,
which are frightening, you know, well-named, famous academic centers where they didn't realize
that that normal saline needed to be added to the concentrated vaccine. And they were actually
vaccinating people with normal saline all day and then wanted to know what they should do.
The Moderna, it's pre-mixed. It's in the bottle. It's really, you know, I think very
idiot-proof. Nothing's completely idiot-proof, but so okay. What about side effects and efficacy? So
I'm going to talk a little case here about something that's been in the press a little bit and people
have been asking about what about the issue of myocarditis after vaccination? So people may have
heard that there was a concern raised initially with Pfizer. Was there an increased risk, increased
incidence of myocarditis after Pfizer vaccination? Information out of Israel suggesting that maybe
there was an increased incidence. Pfizer replying with, well, it's really not above background.
But one of the interesting issues that we saw last year is we actually saw a decline
in the amount of myocarditis that we were seeing. So we got called on a, you know, somewhat regular
basis. A adolescent seems to be men more than women. So adolescent males, you know, late teens
or early 20s. I guess you're not an adolescent, you're 20s, but young men who have a viral illness,
and then afterwards they'll have a mild inflammation of the heart. So you'll be able to pick this up
with some blood tests, troponins will rise a little bit. They'll have a discomfort in the left chest.
We give them ibuprofen, a leave, things like that for a few days, gets better. They tend to do
very well in general. So this was earlier this week, a gentleman, early 20s, who had gotten his
J&J vaccine. I thought that was a little twist. Four days before, he had had COVID back in December.
A lot of folks had COVID back in December. And then four days after the vaccine, he started to develop
pain on the left side of his chest, rated up into the neck and down the arm. His troponins were
elevated as were some other inflammatory markers. We treated him with a couple days of ibuprofen.
The troponins trended down. He started to feel better, and now he's recovering. But it does
look like there is some sort of connection here. It is a little bit above background.
Interesting enough, it's not above the background of what we used to see when we had viruses circulating
freely. And what I described is sort of a typical course. Even what I described is maybe a little
more severe where he actually get the elevated enzymes. But short-lived, people take the ibuprofen,
the leave, they have discomfort for a couple days, it resolves. So that is out there. The CDC
has basically said this is low incidence. It's a low risk. And it's not really something that
should impact your decisions regarding vaccination. But we'll hit on that a little bit later as well.
Now, what about efficacy? So on one hand, we're being told not to check serology tests. But then
we keep seeing articles talking about serology tests. And then we bemoan the fact that certain
populations seem not to be responding. So this is a publication that came out looking at patients
with rheumatoid arthritis who are taking a medication called methotrexate, which interferes
with the immune system. The article was methotrexate, hamper's immunogenicity to BNT162B2 mRNA COVID-19
vaccine, an immune mediated inflammatory disease. Actually, it was earlier on a call with Shane
Crotty. So I brought this up and we talked about this a little. So a shout out to Shane Crotty,
who's hopefully helping us understand some of the immunology in this realm. But this was a paper
that if you really look at it closely, it tells a slightly different story from the title. So
they looked at the spike specific SARS-CoV-2 antibody titers from people with immune-mediated
inflammatory disease. And they found that those were in a range of, people have to write these down,
but 25 to 737,310. Those on methotrexate, 25 to 694,528. I wasn't impressed by that difference.
The median was actually lower. So the median, the middle number where people were clustering,
was a little bit lower for those on methotrexate. But then we get back to the question of what really
is the cutoff for protection? So was this median difference actually above or below? Is it a question
of more protection? I was used, Eloise, an example. Was this a 95 versus a 99? Once we're in the 90s,
I feel like we're pretty good. So the other thing that I thought was really interesting,
if you look at the data, you can see that twice as many people. So 19% of the people,
not a methotrexate, had prior infection and then got vaccinated. And we know that skews the data,
right? We know that people that have prior infection who get vaccinated are going to have
higher numbers. That was 19.2% versus 8%. So are we sort of getting a skew here? Are we studying
people who are previously infected and vaccinated versus people uninfected and then vaccinated? So
I would have much preferred a study on methotrexate or not in people without prior infection.
Maybe methotrexate or not in people with prior infection versus sort of sticking all those together.
And then they also looked at T cells as well, again, with the same caveats, but suggesting a
lower T cell response in individuals on methotrexate. So this is clearly a hot topic right now,
because there's really people would like to know, particularly, we'll say the
higher risk populations, people with impaired immune system,
are transplant patients, are patients with autoimmune diseases, hematological. So those are the blood
cancers, lymphomas, leukemia, things like that. They would want to know if they got their vaccine,
if they actually have protection or not. What is happening right now is that a lot of their
physicians are checking anybody levels. And if those anybody levels do not come back above a
certain level, they're being told by the physician to act as if they're not vaccinated.
I don't know if that's true or not. We don't know if that's true or not. As I mentioned,
we've had studies where you vaccinate transplant patients and then check what percent have
antibody levels. The one we discussed was about 15 percent after the first, a little less than
50 percent after the second. People are going and giving these individuals a third shot.
We do not know if that's required. We do not know what correlates of immunity here. So
I think we need to know because if we don't know, people are going to continue to do these things
to sort of try to get out in front of the science to try to help these patients.
And it is really tough because there's also an equity issue here, right? We're talking about
people getting thirds when some people in the world haven't even had firsts. So this is a tough
issue. But the reality here in the US is we now have more vaccines than demand. So some of those
vaccines each day are going to waste. So do we do we say you guys sign up and instead of it going
into the trash, it hard-fosme, it goes into one of these individual's arms. Does that make a difference?
Again, something we really need to study so we know what to do for these individuals.
The period of detectable viral replication. So I like to say the time for monitoring
or monoclonals. And then I also want to add where you get your test is where you should get
your monoclonals. So we're seeing some changes in which monoclonals are recommended in certain
areas. So the increasing rate of the variants. I'm going to use the old terminology here. P1
and B351. Should I translate those into our Roman numerals? So that would be the P1 or the gamma
variant of concern. That would be the 1351. That's the beta. So basically what they're saying is these
clinically relevant important changes are suggesting that we should be switching over to
Regeneron instead of the Eli Lilly monoclonal antibody in eight states. And really, there's
an anticipation that as we see more of these variants, this is why I care about the variants
to be honest. It impacts therapy. And David Ho a long time ago just said, Dan, just start using
Regeneron. You don't have to worry about this. And now we have more products on the horizon,
right? We've got the GSK, which basically now in the in the EUA fact sheet, they actually have
data on the ability of the different monoclonals to have efficacy with different variants out there.
So yeah, so this is usually not being made at the bedside. We were talking earlier today with
a number of physicians. This is being made usually by the pharmacists at some of the infusion centers,
at some of the hospitals, at some of the regional distribution, basically which monoclonal that
happens to be on us to make sure that when you send your patient from monoclonals,
that they're being treated with a monoclonal, which is appropriate for what's going on in
your regional area. All right, the early inflammatory phase, the the Cole Corona article finally came
out as a peer reviewed article. So Colchicine for community treated patients with COVID-19
Cole Corona, a phase three randomized double-blinded adaptive placebo controlled multi-center trial.
And this was published in the Lancet Respiratory Medicine. And we did cover this before in its
preprint state. But here it is. This is a phase three randomized double-blind adaptive placebo
controlled multi-center trial done in Brazil, Canada, Greece, South Africa, Spain, and the USA
by the Montreal Heart Institute. And the primary efficacy endpoint was the composite of death
or hospital admission for COVID-19. And cut to the chase, they failed to show any statistically
significant benefit for Colchicine in the treatment of COVID-19. But there was a significant
increase in diarrhea. But now the plot does perhaps thicken. If you really start reading
through the discussion here, they report that due to a lack of reagents, a lot of these cases,
they were never able to actually test and confirm that it was COVID. So a lot of the cases included
in the analysis, never got a PCR test was a clinical diagnosis. So the the authors then,
I'm going to say data mind, right? You're not really supposed to do this. They went through
in data mind and suggested that if you then only look at people with PCR positivity cases,
then you could show a benefit to Colchicine. So this, this story may continue. Now I'm going to,
I've noticed that we've been getting a little bit too long, I'm going to say. So I'm going to go
right to the tail phase here. So we still have a very limited understanding of mechanisms behind
much of what we are seeing in this population. And so with the pulmonary issues and neurological
issues being very common, we did see what I hope is the first in a line of articles giving us a
little better understanding of what's going on with long COVID. And this was the article
Small Airways Disease is a post acute sequelae of SARS-CoV-2 infection. This was posted as
preprint. The authors looked at adults with confirmed COVID-19 who had remained symptomatic
more than 30 days following the acute onset of symptoms. So symptoms, pulmonary function tests,
chest computed tomography. So chest CT findings were compared across different severity groups
to healthy controls. CT images were analyzed measuring regional ground glass opacities.
And they actually measured regional air trapping. They had a special algorithm for this. They looked
at 100 patients, 67 of them were ambulatory, had never been hospitalized. And they report
that the pulmonary function testing revealed restrictive physiology rights, as long as we're
not expanding, as much as it was restriction there. In the hospitalized at the ICU groups,
but normal in the ambulatory group. Among the hospitalized and ICU patients,
the mean percent of the total unclassified as that ground glass opacification was 13.2
and 28.7%. So 13.2 and hospitalized, 28.7 in the prior ICU patients, respectively.
And was higher than in the ambulatory ambulatory patients, you're only seeing about 3.7%.
So they were suggesting here that air trapping, this small airway disease was a significant issue
in a lot of these individuals. It could be quantified by CT, and it did actually correspond
to initial severity. So I think that's helpful, right? Because we're starting to try to understand
what is going on. This is definitely a mixed group of patients here. So what I want to say, too,
is long COVID has become a major issue for society and actually for employers. So I've been in a
number of calls in the last couple of weeks here, where a lot of our large employers have realized
that a chunk consistent with the literature, 10% or more of their individuals who had COVID
are now having difficulties returning to the workplace in full capacity. And I've been asked
to help with identifying these past post-acute squalive COVID centers of excellence. This is
really a challenge, right? We've all heard of centers of excellence. And that is not, that
should not just be a marketing term. This needs to be a center that can demonstrate
some sort of excellence, some outcomes that are excellent compared to the other options
that a patient might have. So we've talked a little bit about what criteria there should be
here, and I'd love to hear some impact from people here. Because this is, I feel like we're in the
early days of long COVID, much the way we were in the early days of COVID about a year ago.
But what works, what benefits people? And we're getting a lot of input from patients on this.
The CDC is hopefully going to come out with our guidance soon, which we'll discuss. But one of
the things that seems key is that a multi-disciplinary team is in place. So this gives a patient access
to pulmonary neurology, psychiatric infectious disease, and other specialists with experience
treating acute as well as long COVID patients. I sort of shy away here from narrow focused
programs, which just look at post-ICU, just post-hospital, or just really roll these people into a
pre-existing or expanded rehabilitation program. It is much more than just post-ICU rehab. We're
also looking at this. I think it's important that we truly have centers. So you need a critical number
of patients because we are still as clinicians learning from the patients. This is a dialogue.
We don't know the answers yet. And so as you interact with a larger volume of patients,
you can learn quite a bit more. We also want, and this ties directly in,
centers that can connect patients to clinical trials. We are still learning. And what is the
plural of anecdote? It is not data. So not only do we feel like we're learning as we treat these
patients, but we want to get these patients connected in clinical trials. So we can really
formalize that into real science, real data, so we know how to help these folks. Telemedicine
capability is really of great benefit for these patients. So we think of that as probably essential
for some of these centers. And what are those measures of excellence? What are we hoping to
provide for these patients? One, which is huge for a lot of our patients, they want to be back
to the ability to perform those things they did before. They want to get back to work. They want
to get back to that prior function. They want improvement in symptoms. If it's trouble breathing,
if it's brain fog, if it's headaches, if it's fatigue, they want improvement in symptoms.
And these centers should actually be providing good patient satisfaction. We want
centers where this experience is positive because boy, these patients have been through an
incredibly difficult time with a lot of dismissiveness. All right, well, let me close there before we
go to emails and thank everyone for continuing to go to parasites without borders.com and please
do that. Drop whatever you're doing. If you're driving to the side of the road on your smartphone,
go to parasites without borders and click donate and help us do the work we're doing,
but also help us continue to support FIMRC Foundation International Medical Relief of Children.
This is a fantastic group and I will throw in. I know there's been a lot of discussion of cattle
on the other twibs. I may be one of the only Twib hosts who actually owns cattle. Does anyone
else own cattle? I have a milk cow and Brian and I also have a heifer, Mary, in Uganda. So I am
hoping that we can get this pandemic going in the right direction so I can get back there to Uganda
to the FIMRC clinic there. See my cows, see my friends. So help us with your support.
Yeah, you have mentioned that a few times. Your cows and Uganda. It's very cool.
Not cows. They're both cows, right? One's a heifer and one's a cow. Well, one is a cow, right? So
you got to be what? Over the age of three, you got to have had a baby, you got to be so she's a milk
cow. That's the mom. And Mary is just a heifer. She's a little over a year old.
Never had a baby, right? Never had a baby yet. Give her a couple of years, Vincent.
You bet. Time for some questions. If you'd like to send one in to Daniel, it's Daniel at
microb.tv. First is from Kevin. My son is 12. We got his first dose the weekend. It was available.
He's due for the next dose, June 5th. I'm reading in some places that perhaps delaying the second
dose a few weeks months might lower the myocarditis risk that some kids are experiencing. I assume
this would violate the never miss a chance to vaccinate credo, but wanted a direct answer from
someone I have grown to trust on this issue. I'm not considering permanently postponing.
I just wanted your opinion. Please treat this as you are in my shoes as his father.
All right, Kevin. So I'm actually pretty much in your shoes. I have a 15 year old son Barnaby.
He is scheduled for his second dose tomorrow afternoon. And as I mentioned with the myocardis,
it's incredibly rare. The cases are mild. It's something that we can manage with just a couple
days of really over-the-counter anti-inflammatory medicine. The risk of continuing to have your
son my son unvaccinated is significant compared to this risk. So don't go ahead. Don't miss your
opportunity. Don't delay. You know, once this is in, we've seen data saying that boy, these
adolescents have really robust protection over time. So hopefully for them, this may be the last
time this may be years and years of protection. Josh in Toronto writes, our 75 year old mother
has been diagnosed with plasma cell leukemia, has been hospitalized for observation, started on
dexamethasone about to begin bortezomib and lenaldomide. She has received one dose of Pfizer in March.
Second dose has been delayed in Canada till July. Has been offered a second dose now. Is this
recommended as her immune system is very taxed at present? And will her shot be compromised
by chemo treatments? Curious about your approach in this scenario? Yeah, so she's on a number of
medicines, right? So she has what I talked about the blood cancer, a plasma cell leukemia, right?
I think I threw lymphoma in there, but really your leukemia is your classic blood cancers.
She started here dexamethasone, the steroids, which we think also interferes with B cell function.
She's on bortezomib, a proteasome inhibitor. So that's also going to affect our immune cells.
And she's on lenaldomide. And so yeah, this is basically a whole concoction designed to mess with
B cells, plasma cells, plasma cells are really differentiated B cells. So when she gets vaccinated
and you go and you know, like we're not supposed to and check her anybody levels three or four
weeks later, they may be low. They may still be low right now. We still encourage people to get
vaccinated. It may be that at some point in the future, as I discussed, this might be a population
that is eligible either for a third dose, or maybe it's a population that is eligible for
prophylactic antibodies. The vaccine that she gets, it's not going to be harmful.
It may be beneficial. We just don't know how beneficial it is. So this would be a context
where we would say definitely this is a high risk person. I would encourage the vaccination
benefits would far outweigh the risks. Lee writes, I feel a complication with a prior disease I had
when I was a child. Mononucleosis Epstein Barr has something to do with why the vaccine made me ill
for six weeks. Is there any information on this? Anyone I could talk to the vaccine is so new,
none of the doctors have talked to locally have any idea. The only suggested that the vaccine
triggered something that was dormant to become active again. It had all the symptoms of mono
again, plus some other neurological symptoms. Yeah, so I'm happy to I'm happy to help and I'll
just actually offer, you know, so we have our post COVID care center where we actually have also
sort of opened up and said, we're willing to talk to people and help people who have vaccine
reactions. And often I'll jump in and help on issues like this. And again, we don't have great
science here, but we are starting to get enough experience that hopefully we can offer some help.
So people could just go ahead and they can call 151642 COVID. And also I do telemedicine
consults across the country. So they can call 516-656-6500. My staff is killing me because
I am working very late doing all these telemedicine, but I'm happy to help. This is a tough time.
And if I can help you navigate post vaccination issues, I'm happy to step in and do that.
And Jennifer writes, my mother went through breast cancer treatment has been in remission
five years. However, she was left with peripheral neuropathy affecting her legs. Additionally,
she had COVID in February. She asked her primary care MD if she should get the COVID vaccine and
the doctor's answer was, well, I had to get it. So it's up to you. I'm not sure that was the
most effective response. So my mother looked online for information. Of course, she found lots of
disinformation. She's hesitant to get the vaccine. She's concerned it will worsen the neuropathy.
Can you please provide guidance that will enable her to make a proper decision?
This is one of those situations, and hopefully the physicians are listening, that if you leave
a vacuum, someone else will fill it, and it won't really be the person you want to fill it.
And I think that's what we're seeing here. So not really a great answer, doctor.
This is a priority. I really think, and you look at this individual with this story,
this is a person, if you get them vaccinated, you may be saving their lives. So you want
to have this discussion. So here's what I'm going to say. So breast cancer treatment,
remission for five years, that's that when we say, okay, that's behind us.
Peripheral neuropathy. We are not seeing any issues here in the story that makes me suggest
there's any reason to delay. This is an individual where I'm going to say I encourage you to get
vaccinated. That's COVID-19 clinical update number 65 with Dr. Daniel Griffin. Thank you, Daniel.
All right, thank you, and everyone be safe.
