This week in virology, the podcast about viruses, the kind that make you sick.
From Microbe TV, this is Twiv, this week in virology, Episode 767, recorded on June 10, 2021.
I'm Vincent Racken Yello, and you are listening to the podcast all about viruses joining me today
from New York, Daniel Griffin. Hello, everyone. Well, Daniel, you got another
wide-body aircraft, 767. That's what I was hoping. So I'm happy with that. You know,
you got to take what you can. What's the biggest aircraft do we know?
Is it Alan? We need Alan to be known as the biggest aircraft ever. I don't know. I have no idea.
When I was a kid, I actually flew as a kid, but I preferred gliders. I always been that like
sailing gliders. And it's just something amazing about being up there without an engine,
and then catching the thermals spiraling up. Gliding looks great, but I don't want to do it.
I'm good. All right, let's start with our quotation. The idea that some lives matter less is the
root of all that is wrong with the world. And that's Paul Farmer. I don't know if people are
familiar with Paul Farmer. He's actually the co-founder and chief strategist of Partners in
Health, which is a pretty significant international nonprofit organization that's existed since the
1980s, providing health care services, but also involved in research and advocacy.
And I have to admit, my first exposure to Paul Farmer was reading the book Mountains Beyond
Mountains by Tracy Kitter. And that's really a must read for. I was going to say for people
going into global health, but I'm just going to say it's a must read, just a really impressive,
inspiring individual. And really, my wife and I were actually talking about Paul Farmer the
other night, just about how he truly lives this message. He really treats every human being
as if they're the most important person in the world. My wife says that she and I are a little
too tribal. Our kids come first, and everyone else second. For Paul, I think he treats everyone
like they're his son, his daughter. So I think as we're going into the next phase, we're going to
have to realize that the developed nations, the nations with more resources really need to be
there for everyone. You know, you can't have J&J vaccines expiring while people are still
dying in many parts of the world without access. So I thought I would start with that as our quotation,
but let me give an update. Today was a milestone at the two hospitals where I spent my
morning, earlier part of the day, not a single COVID case, not a single active COVID case in
either hospital. You know, over at some of the other hospitals, there are still some COVID cases,
but boy, COVID has fallen off a cliff here in my immediate area. You know, the weather's getting
better. There's a combination of vaccines and also boy, a bunch of people got infected already.
So we really have things going in the right direction. And what I'm going to start with is
actually we have learned a lot. So we have a lot of evidence based recommendations now, which
really makes my world a lot better. So I was just going to start with sort of the executive
summary of the ID Society of America's guidelines, just what they're recommending for and against,
but I'm going to give a little context. So there's there's 19 recommendations, some of them are kind
of, you know, combinations, so to speak. So recommendation number one, hydroxychloroquine
against recommendation to hydroxychloroquine plus azithromycin also against not using
lopinovir azithromycin, not using lopinovir ritonovir. The next recommendation four and five
dexamethasone, not in the outpatient, but recommended in the inpatient setting if a person has a
oxygen saturation less than 94%. Recommendation seven for those hospitalized patients with
progressive severe COVID-19 with elevated markers of systemic inflammation, escalation in that
oxygen requirement, suggesting the use of toselism map, right, the IL six receptor blocker among
patients hospitalized with COVID-19 recommending against convalescent plasma. As far as the ambulatory
patients want to get some more studies on that, but not not just doing it as a standard remdesivir
falling into that same criteria, the hospitalized patient less than 94%. But if that patient actually
is more severe, invasive ventilation recommending against it, people actually do worse. So timing
current theme really matters here and recommending five days, not 10. So five days across the board,
if you're going to be using remdesivir, again, only in the right patient jumping to femotidine,
pepsid, you know, those antacids that are going to cure your COVID recommending against
femotidine, then we get into our monoclonals. And actually now the ID Society of America
is recommending they've been doing this for a little while, but they are recommending using
combination monoclonals, such as the BAM, BAM, a testament map in areas with appropriate
susceptibilities, or the Regeneron Cocktail, Cassie M. Devamap, but not monotherapy with BAM
LIVAMap. And they haven't quite added the VRGSK monoclonal, which is our third, you know, EUA
approach. What about barit to sit to nib, right? We haven't really talked too much about that.
This is actually a therapy that is in there as a recommendation. But as people have probably
noticed, it really hasn't gotten a lot of uptake, limited evidence that maybe a shortened hospital
stay by about a day. But it's not something a lot of us are particularly comfortable using,
but it just, I will give it some mention there. No one's complete without a mention of Ivermectin,
right? So we are going to return to Ivermectin. But basically they're saying at this point,
we still need clinical trials. This isn't something that should be used outside of clinical trials,
we need those clinical trials. But we will get back to Ivermectin. Okay, children and COVID,
as I like to say, children are at low risk, but they're not at no risk. And I think that's
reasonable. I think that's accurate. Someone recently suggested to me that now that we're aware that
every year, over 100 children here in the US die from flu, perhaps now people will be more
motivated to get their children and themselves vaccinated. I'll never comprehend the lesson
warm comments I get when I talk about children and and COVID here. But I actually, we are actually
pointing out some things that maybe people didn't realize. I know early on people said, Oh, we've
we've been comfortable with 100 children dying every year. I'm not comfortable with 100 children
dying every year of the flu. And I'm certainly not comfortable with 300 to 500 children having
died of COVID. You know, I've been working with a lot of schools, summer programs, sporting programs,
businesses, trying to translate this science into safe mitigation practices, really for
over a year now. And I do like to reinforce that in all these different settings where I've
offered free advice, right? Sometimes it wasn't free actually. I think the NHL is supposed to
send me a paycheck at some point. But we haven't had any we haven't had any transmission. This is
something that can be done safely. But as I always point out, it's also something that can be done
unsafely. So more from the CDC MMWR. And this article got quite a bit of press. Hospitalization
of adolescents age 12 to 17 with laboratory confirmed COVID-19 COVID net 14 states, March 1st,
2020, April 24, 2021. And this came out as an early release. And the authors reported that COVID-19
adolescent hospitalization rates peaked at 2.1 per 100,000 in early January. Then we're headed
in the right direction with this declining to 0.6 in mid March. However, in April 2021,
the rate more than doubled up to 1.3 per 100,000. Among hospitalized adolescents, nearly one-third
were admitted to the ICU and 5% required invasive mechanical ventilation. No associated deaths
were reported during this period of time. A couple of things I want to say about this.
This is accurate. What they said is true. But doubling from 0.6 per 100,000 up to 1.3 per 100,000,
the numbers are still low. In my mind, a single preventable death or hospitalization is one too
many. I already mentioned the comparator to the flu deaths that we see. But this continues
to be low. And actually, it looks like it's dropping, right? Look at the number of cases.
It's dropping all across the board. So I think we've learned that the fact that masks and
social isolation and many other aspects of the pandemic have had a very negative impact on our
children. So a lot of discussion now and reasonable about moving forward now that the rates are
very low in a lot of our populations and also that we're rolling out expanding our vaccination
effort. So I want to say things look good relative to our children. Things look really good relative
to the summer and next fall. Pre-exposure period transmission. This remains a hot topic.
I think rightfully so. I recently was emailing a bit with Michael Mena. I think some of our
listeners know him of the liquor stick and just talking about how, for science communication,
the concept of aerosol and airborne has been quite difficult. We say, hey, one in 10,000 cases are
attributable to contact. So oh my gosh, that means COVID is contact transmission. Well,
it is, but it is usually not in that situation. We've talked about the number of cases that occur
within the three to six feet in close contact. But we've also clearly discussed that there are
a number of cases that occur even when you're outside those six feet. And we've talked about
the role of ventilation improvements where you're clearly beyond that six feet, improving the risk
reducing the risk of transmission. So hopefully we will get a little better, better language that
we will have less confusion and controversy and we can really focus on what's important,
which is keeping people safe and communicating the essential messages on how to do that.
Why are we talking about Michael Mena? He actually just published another paper.
And this was out of his group estimating epidemiological dynamics from cross-sectional
viral load distributions. And this was published in science. And the authors suggest that the
population distribution of viral loads observed in the form of CT values, right, the cycle threshold
values that you get from the ECR testing actually changes during a pandemic. And they argue that the
CT values, even from limited numbers of random samples, can provide estimates of an epidemic's
trajectory, right? So they're trying to say, this might be a tool we can use.
Should we see the next pandemic or even in this pandemic? They go on to demonstrate that
combining data from multiple samples can improve the precision and robustness of this estimation.
And they looked at CT values from surveillance conducted during the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic
in a variety of settings. And they offer alternative approaches for real-time estimates
of the epidemic trajectories for this outbreak management based on these values. What they're
really trying to suggest is they bring up the observed CT values and the fact that they have
varied over the course of the pandemic and saying you do not need to invoke fitness changes,
necessarily genetic changes in the virus. There actually can be a trajectory of the pandemic.
So this is, I have to say, it is a complicated paper, but it is worth reading. So we'll get it up
there on our website. And I'm going to suggest again that sharing this information, I think it
should be a standard part of every PCR report, whether it's positive or negative, but also at
what level it's positive or negative. The more this information is out there and shared. I think
we're all smart enough, educated enough that we can handle that information and try to make
something of it. Active vaccination, never miss an opportunity to vaccinate and vaccines are how
this pandemic ends. And I'm going to try to throw some stories in here. I was throwing these
stories where a clinician has maybe not managed to patient as best as they might have. And I do
that as a way of teaching, sort of bringing out people. So I would never do that. And hopefully
that sticks in their minds. But I do, I get a lot of communication from a lot of really,
I'm going to say really, really at really hardworking primary care clinicians across the country
that are not making these mistakes. So I really apply this has been a really tough 18 months and
a lot of say a lot of our 12 listeners, a lot of physicians out there are really putting in
those extra hours and staying up to date. We're still seeing these individuals come in. I just
grabbed an individual last week. I mentioned that the two hospitals I went to today had no COVID,
but my partner, Anujali just admitted a woman late 50s diabetic, not vaccinated. She was exposed
because her dad was ill also in the hospital, sort of missed the window for vaccine, missed the window
for the monoclonals. So I think that we've got to keep hammering on this. You know, this is a
the Hail Mary as some people like to say for the unvaccinated. Let's talk about not only vaccines,
but what about prior infection? So there was a paper incidence of SARS-CoV-2 infection,
according to baseline antibody status in staff and residents of 100 long-term care
facilities, Vivaldi, a prospective cohort study. And this was published in the Lancet
Healthy Longevity Journal. Now, I do not subscribe to this journal for disclosure, but perhaps I should.
I mean, who does not want healthy longevity? But this was a prospective cohort study of SARS-CoV-2
infection in staff less than 65 years of age. Interesting enough. And the residents were all
over age 65. And they looked at 100 long-term care facilities in England between October 1,
2020 and February 1, 2021. Now that sounds like a lot, right? But at the end of the day,
they only ended up looking at 682 residents from 86 of the long-term care facilities
and 1,429 staff members from 97 long-term care facilities, just, you know, who met criterion
who could be included. At baseline, IgG antibodies to nuclear capsid were detected in 226 of the
682 residents, so about a third and 408, so 29%, about a third of the 1,429 staff members.
They then observed that 20% of the 456 residents who are antibody negative and included at baseline
went on to have a positive PCR test compared with 2% of the 226 residents who were antibody
positive at baseline. What about the staff? 11% of the staff that were antibody negative at the
beginning went on to have a positive versus 2% of the staff who were antibody positive at baseline.
So they give us adjusted hazard ratio for the serology positive residents of 0.15.
And for staff, 0.39. Now, what were sort of the interesting things about this study?
One was that this study had to be kind of impacted because we have the rapid rollout of vaccines
long-term care facilities in England starting December 8th. So mixed in here is single-dose
vaccine protection in previously infected, and then the data seems a little bit less clear.
And this is going to bring up what I think is important challenge for us going forward,
trying to collect data about the impact of natural infection compared to vaccines,
and also the issue that we're going to come up to. What about variants? So there was a research
letter that hit you with another right in here in this section, assessment of SARS-CoV-2
reinfection in Lombardi, Italy. So now we're moving from UK to Italy. And here the authors are
reporting on the incidence of SARS-CoV-2 primary infection and reinfection among individuals who
during the first wave of the pandemic in Italy underwent diagnostic PCR testing. And the results
of this study suggested that patients who had recovered from SARS-CoV-2 COVID-19 had a lower
risk of reinfection, and there appeared to be a protective effect out to about a year.
And the authors here did comment that this observation all ended right before we started
to see the SARS-CoV-2 variants enter Italy. Now there's a study that actually has gotten a
lot of attention, so we'll spend a little bit of time on this. And this was a preprint,
so this is not peer reviewed, and it needs some peer review, necessity of COVID-19 vaccination
in previously infected individuals. So this preprint was a study looking at employees of
the Cleveland Clinic Health System. Now fortunately from a science standpoint, but unfortunately
from a public health standpoint, it did not look like there was great success in terms of vaccine
uptake. The authors reported that the majority of employees that had been previously infected
did not get vaccinated, and only 59% of the other employees got vaccinated.
So not a great job of employees getting vaccinated out there at the Cleveland Clinic.
They also reported that 5% of their employees ended up getting infected with COVID-19 prior
to the start of this study. So far, not really great stuff for the Cleveland Clinic here.
What they did is they performed a retrospective cohort study, and what they obtained was a waiver
of informed consent, so they did not need any of the employees to actually consent for their data
to be used here. They got a waiver of HIPAA authorization so that these researchers could
go ahead and access all these employees' personal health information and records.
And then the authors compared four groups. So you have group one. These are previously infected,
unvaccinated, previously infected, vaccinated, not previously infected, unvaccinated, and not
previously infected, vaccinated. And then they followed these individuals over five months.
And there's a plot. It's a Simon Makuk plot. Looks a lot like those Kaplan-Meyer curves we
see over time, the rates of infection. And it's sort of striking to the eyes that the only area
where you're seeing significant rates of new infection are in the not previously infected,
unvaccinated population. Now, the authors make several allowances. They do comment that their
results are quite a bit different from a large study out of Denmark looking at, well, actually,
it was a population of 4 million PCR tested individuals in Denmark study. So that paper,
assessment of protection against reinfection with SARS-CoV-2 among 4 million PCR tested
individuals in Denmark in 2020, a population level observational study. The authors commented
that that study suggested only about an 80.5% reduction and only a 47.1% reduction in those
over the age of 65. So they comment that their results in this preprint are quite a bit different,
quite a bit more rosy and encouraging than we saw in that study. Their study also was only a
five-month follow-up, right? So we sort of have this idea that you don't test people for the first
three. So a lot of people have asked me about, was it really just a two-month follow-up? So
you got to look at that in terms of the numbers. And they also comment, I think this is really
critical all across the board. It is not known how well these results will hold if or when some
of the newer variants of concern become prominent. So we're getting, we're getting, I think,
encouraging information, you know, which we expected about a lower risk of being infected
if you've been infected in the past. But unfortunately, the data we're seeing now is the
majority of infections now in the US are not with the original variant. They're with the new
variant. So we are in that world that was discussed here of newer variants. And that's the infections
we're seeing. It becomes a whole new question. We know the vaccines, we have better and better data
on vaccine efficacy against variants. We do not have as great data suggesting that people with
prior infection are going to fare well with the new variants. So I continue to recommend to my
patients who've been previously infected that they go ahead with the vaccine. Now this is going
to be a sort of a tricky one here. I didn't realize how complicated this was. But what do we as
clinicians do now when people come from overseas and they got some sort of vaccine outside the US?
How do we handle that? Well, fortunately, thanks, the CDC has given us a playbook on how to do this.
And if you go to the CDC, they have a section where they basically talk about what to do for
a person who received a COVID-19 vaccine outside the US. And they break this down into really, I'm
going to say three basic categories. But this is coming up. I get calls from clinicians all the
time. So I'm going to send them to this 12 and the answers will be here. But let's take a category
number one. This is a person who has received all the recommended doses of a COVID-19 vaccine
that is listed for emergency use by the WHO. What do we do? Nothing. We consider them vaccinated.
This is not just restricted to the FDA. Three that we have. These are any of those vaccines
on the WHO list, which I will go through scenario number two. The person has not gotten all the doses.
But they did start on one of these series of what's considered a WHO approved vaccine.
You go ahead in that case and just offer them to the opportunity to complete one of our FDA
authorized COVID-19 vaccine series. So let's hit a little scenarios here. Let's say they got a
Moderna, a Pfizer overseas. You can give them that second Moderna or Pfizer dose here in the US,
considered completed. What if they got an AstraZeneca overseas? You can then
give them a two dose of the mRNA or you can give them a J&J. So little subtlety there.
What if they received a vaccine that you've never heard of that is not on the WHO list? So
they come and they said, you know what? I got my CO vaccine, inactivated vaccine produced by
the biotech into India. What do you do? In that case, we just go ahead. We treat them as if they
were unvaccinated and we just recommend it going ahead with an FDA authorized COVID-19 vaccine series.
So those are our three scenarios here. A little subtlety. You want to wait at least 28 days after
that last dose of a vaccine that is not on the WHO list. And what are the current vaccines on
that list as of May 13th when it was last updated? That's their Pfizer BioNTech, the AstraZeneca,
the J&J, Moderna, Sinopharm, and Sinovac. Questions? Go to the CDC website. All right.
The period of detectable viral replication, the viral symptom phase, the time for monitoring
and monoclonals. And as I like to say, where you get your test is where you should be able to get
your monoclonals. So we had some exciting news. On June 4th, Regenera announced that the FDA
authorized lower 1,200 milligram intravenous and subcutaneous dose regen cove. So that's the
Casa Rivemab and the MDebemab antibody cocktail to treat patients with COVID-19. And it was the
subcutaneous part that got me the most excited because this means we can really start expanding
access to these impressive medications. I know a lot of the hospitals are going to sort of stick
with what they've got. A lot of them, I know in the New York area have switched over to Regeneron.
But this is potentially a chance for those urgent care, some of those primary care sites
to go ahead. It was a little bit harder than I wish it was. It is a smaller volume, but it's
still four shots. But that's a lot less than having to get something out of the freezer,
set up an IV. So I think that that's great. All right. So I'm going to throw a little story.
I'll call this missed opportunity. And this is this is a woman that we're currently taking care of.
I sort of alluded a woman in her late 50s, carrying a little bit of extra weight,
diabetes, just recently diagnosed with COVID. This is not the woman admitted this morning.
She was unvaccinated, sort of part of a group of individuals who are also unvaccinated. And that
was the exposure. At the time of diagnosis, monoclonals were not offered. And I think I told a little bit
about how this woman ended up doing poorly. So just kind of keep this in mind. She ended up saying,
like, I don't want to expose my family and ended up in the hospital. Unfortunately, now she's on
a ventilator. So just keep in mind, if you decide not to get vaccinated, you can still get monoclonals.
An article, Co-infections, secondary infections, and antimicrobial use in patients hospitalized
with COVID-19 during the first pandemic wave from the ISA-RIC WHO, CCP UK study. This is a multi-center
prospective cohort study published in the Lancet Microbe. And I have to say when I read this paper,
it made me sad. Really what they observed was that 85.2% of patients with COVID ended up receiving.
They did not require, but they ended up receiving one or more antimicrobials, antibiotics at some
point during their admission. And there was a lot of use of broad spectrum agents, a lot of use of
carbapenums, rather than the carbapenum sparing alternative. So really using those top shelf
restricted antibiotics in the context of a viral illness. All right, Ivermectin, yet another paper
on Ivermectin. And this one was published in the journal Viruses. And this was effects of a single
dose of Ivermectin on viral and clinical outcomes in asymptomatic SARS-CoV-2 infected subjects,
a pilot clinical trial in Lebanon. This was a randomized control trial conducted in 100 asymptomatic
subjects in Lebanon that had tested positive for SARS-CoV-2, five days after having come in contact
with a suspected or positive case. So we really had good timing here. This is looking at early
treatment. The authors reported that at baseline, the two groups had similar viral loads as assessed
by CT values. So 15.13 versus 14.2. The treatment group received a single dose of Ivermectin. So
this is a single dose of Ivermectin adjusted by weight. They also received what is the standard
of care in Lebanon, which is zinc and vitamin C as well. And the authors reported two findings.
At 72 hours after the regimen was started, the increase in CT values was significantly higher
in the Ivermectin than the control group. So higher CT values, lower viral load. In the Ivermectin
group, the CT increased from 15 to 30 compared to the control group where it only went from 14
to 18.96. Moreover, more subjects in the control group developed symptoms. 6% of the control
population required hospitalization. Nobody in the Ivermectin treated group required hospitalization.
So I'm going to, I'm going to muse a little bit on this here. As, and people should listen to the
Twiv that came right before this big body airplane episode with David Fagan bomb. I mean, David,
David's great. David's another one of these like Paul, Paul, farmer type guys who just really what,
what a just amazing story of a man who has done so much with so many challenges. And he's really
said, listen, Ivermectin is something that we do not know the answer to. We have some studies that
are positive. We have some studies that are negative. We don't have enough data on Ivermectin where I
think it's reasonable to say that, oh my gosh, withholding Ivermectin is a crime against humanity,
a crime against humanity is that we have not done the really good trials that we need to do
to help us in this realm. So we're all fingers crossed that active six in addition to inhaled
steroids, fluvoxamine. Maybe Ivermectin will be in there because one of the issues is that people
are using this widely throughout the world, probably second only to hydroxychloroquine,
which unfortunately some people are still using and they should stop that. And we need to know
either way with a really good trial so that clinicians patients can make decisions about
whether or not this is something that should be included in the treatment.
All right, early inflammatory phase. Did we talk about aspirin before? Well, aspirin,
we finally got the recovery data on aspirin. And aspirin does not seem to be making a difference.
So the aspirin in patients admitted to hospital with COVID-19 recovery, a randomized control
open label platform trial. This was posted as a preprint. I think all our listeners are familiar
with the big UK recovery trial. Basically, end of the day, aspirin was not associated with
reduction in 28 day mortality or in the risk of progressing to invasive mechanical ventilation
or death. So this is basically 150 milligrams of aspirin once per day versus standard care without
that and not showing a benefit here. So I'm going to just close quickly with a mention of long COVID.
We're trying to find what are the centers of excellence. We're trying to establish some
definitions of what are excellent outcomes. So hopefully we can get patients, unfortunately,
a growing number of patients into those centers. And we are going to continue to support femuric.
So May, June and July, all donations made to parasites without borders will be doubled. We're
hoping to get up to $40,000 to support femuric. So thank you very much. Time for some emails
for Daniel. If you want to send one in, Daniel at microbe.tv. Patty writes any data and or I would
like to know your thoughts on the effectiveness of the Pfizer COVID vaccine on patients who receive
intravenous ocrevis to modulate multiple sclerosis symptoms. Okay, so I've actually gotten a lot
of questions. Actually, ocrevis is one of the one of the culprits that often triggers people to
reach out to me. And what is ocrevis for our listeners? So this is a B cell and plasma cell
depleting therapy. So this targets CD 20. So it's going to get rid of your B cells, your plasma
cells. Basically, you're going to get rid of those antibody producing cells really more of a B cell,
right? You're going to lose your CD 20 when you differentiate the plasma cells. But when someone
gets this, they have very few B cells, they get the vaccine. If you go ahead and check a anti spike
antibody serology, it's going to be negative. Just just to just to say, the B cells are not
there to make those antibodies. So you were relying on a T cell response. What about that T cell
response? I heard there's a T cell test, this T detected by adaptive. The way that that is set
up, the algorithm they use is good for detecting natural infection. It is not yet calibrated to
give us a T cell correlate of immunity. So when these individuals, blood testing is not going to
be helpful. We are concerned, right, that these people have gotten these therapies that they're
not getting the B cell serology response, we hope that we're just relying on T cells.
And we do not know the answer to this. There certainly are people out there giving extra doses
of vaccines. I think we need to study this just like everything else. What we are not seeing,
and I think this is reassuring, we are not seeing these patients ending up in the hospital, right?
I'm not seeing patients who got a crevice. I'm not seeing patients on methadrexate. I'm not seeing
lots of renal transplant or other transplant patients who got vaccinated ending up in the hospital. So
despite a lack of this serological support, we're not seeing the breakthrough that would be as
concerning as people might think in these populations. So I'm a bit reassured in these populations.
I'm also reassured that the level of the virus is going down. But what is the best way to protect
these individuals? It's for everyone else to get vaccinated. Christie from Seattle writes,
is it possible for the COVID vaccine Pfizer to cause an allergy such as cat grass, etc.
To develop a week after my partner got the second shot, he started getting itchy eyes and sneezing
around our cats that we've had for three years. Obviously, there are plenty of coincidental
conditions as you've talked about on the show, and there's still consequences far better than
getting COVID. If possible, why would this happen? Yeah, so this one, you're going to have trouble
doing much of a search on, right? Because everyone's all worried about the anaphylaxis.
I am not sure that there's a relationship here. This has been a particularly bad allergy season.
I have to say I never had allergies before this season. Oh my gosh, I just got COVID shots.
And maybe it's no, no, I'm joking. I don't think there's a connection here. I just think this
is a really bad allergy season. The world's in a slightly better place with how much carbon
mitigation, how much reduction in travel and the rest. We may just be seeing lots of things blooming.
The cat connection, I'm not sure. Joseph writes, in preparing for reopening a program for seniors,
I was asked by my wife to review their reopening policy. Their program provides continuing educational
and recreational programming for seniors. Their program will require COVID vaccination to attend
the program, the average age of the participants about 80 years old. Given their age, the possible
high risk medical conditions of these seniors, would you still recommend that the staff and
participants still mask after vaccination? Yeah, this is a tough one. We've really doubled
down on boy, those vaccines really make a big difference. But I think that you've got to make
individual decisions here. If you're over 80, if you have a number of medical problems,
I think we've talked about people on different medications. That's when if you feel comfortable
continuing to wear a mask, it is a reasonable thing to do. We're still not through this pandemic.
We're only learning about the impact of the vaccines on different variants. Everyone is unique,
as far as their ability to respond to the vaccines, particularly once they get above the age of 80.
So I see no problem continuing with masks. I point out when I go to the gym, I am a robust
healthy individual on no medications with no medical problems in my 50s. I still wear a mask.
I don't think there's a problem with continuing to have extra levels of safety.
And from Stacy, I'm a psychologist in private practice. I have several patients prescribed
either atypical antipsychotics or neuroleptic antipsychotic medication for bipolar disorder,
schizoaffective disorder, borderline personality disorder, and schizophrenia. Their medications
include lithium, clopazine, olanzapine, lemotrigine. Many have expressed concerns about possible
negative interactions between the COVID vaccine and their psychiatric medication.
Several concerns relate to possible toxicity, decrease in efficacy of psychotropics and side
effects. One patient mentioned a fear about the COVID vaccine causing a drop in white blood cells.
I would like to know if there is any evidence to suggest patients on psychotropic medication
should not get vaccinated, and or what resources, research, etc. are available that I can access
to help assure my folks that all the COVID vaccines are safe and effective for individuals
with serious mental illness. Yeah, so I'm going to say you can feel very reassured here.
There's a very robust reporting system, right? Hundreds of millions, over 300 million doses of
COVID vaccines have been given in the United States. We have a robust reporting system.
Any of the concerns, you hear about them. You hear about them in the popular press.
We are really good at watching for these things. We are not seeing any issues in this population,
not seeing any issues with these medications. If there's an issue, we're going to hear about it.
Even if it's something as rare and one in 10 or 20,000, boom, we're going to see that come up on our
adverse reporting systems. I'm going to say very comfortably that this is a safe thing to do.
Being vaccinated is so much safer than not being vaccinated for these individuals.
That's COVID-19 clinical update number 66 with Dr. Daniel Griffin. Thank you, Daniel.
Oh, thank you so much, and everyone be safe.
