This week in virology, the podcast about viruses, the kind that make you sick.
From Microbe TV, this is Twiv. This week in virology, episode 770, recorded on June 17, 2021.
I'm Vincent Rackenjello, and you're listening to the podcast all about viruses.
Joining me today from New York, Daniel Griffin. Hello, everyone.
Now, 770 is not a plane, isn't Daniel, right? But I like that number. It's a nice, easy to
remember, 770. We'll have to see, do I end up hitting 777? Boy, would that be lucky.
Yeah, that's the big one. I've flown, I flew one of those to Singapore once,
it's amazing plane. It really quiet. No, I miss that. I miss traveling. I miss
getting to all these places. I miss my friends in Panama in Uganda.
Yeah, you miss your cows in Uganda, right? Yes, I do. I'm worried they're not going to
recognize me. And the next time I go in there, instead of getting like nuzzled by Brian,
he might get a horn or something. Yeah, they won't remember you. Yeah, you got to go back.
Maybe next year, you'll be able to go, right? I'm hoping. I'm going to be heading to Ghana in
January, and I hope to be able to figure out a time to get to Uganda. But I have to say,
my friend Titus, who's in Blantire, Malawi, is actually saying things are not so great down
there. They're starting to see what for them is a third surge. So tough times.
Not a lot of vaccination in Africa, right? No, and actually that's what I'm hearing,
is they're having issues with they were allocated certain amounts, and now they're
getting less than even they were allocated, which are already small amounts to begin with.
So it's tough times for my friends there. Well, maybe we can give them our Novavax stockpile,
right? I hope so, actually. Yeah, I think that would be great. All right, well, we've got a lot
to cover today. I remember a few weeks ago, my dad was asking me, really? Is there something new
every week about COVID? And actually, I was on the local news channel on Monday morning
with Elizabeth Heshigan. And actually, she told me at the end, she said she has never gotten
more questions during an appearance than she got during the time I was on. So people have
lots of questions about COVID. So let's start answering them. So let me start with our quotation.
The worst thing we can do right now would be to mistake progress for victory.
And that is our own Andy Slavitt. Andy Slavitt is actually known as the fixer, I say our own,
because he was one of our executives at Optum for a while out in Minnesota. And he was really
instrumental, I think, in a very successful vaccine rollout. But he's actually now going to be a
competing podcaster, Vincent. In the bubble is his podcast. I listened to it regularly,
and I will shout out. It's great. Good stuff. All right, let me give a little bit of an update.
Case rates and deaths are down across the country, getting lower here in New York. We've gotten
over 70% vaccination coverage in New York, not quite as good as 80% up in Vermont,
but still some hotspots. I think everyone is aware of this. And at the risk of controversial,
this tends to correspond with low vaccination rates. Maybe people think there's causality there.
And worldwide, again, it really seems like the same situation. We're seeing numbers come down,
but again, certain areas and again, seems to be corresponding with areas with low access to
vaccinations or low vaccine uptake. We're also seeing another variant, the Delta variant.
And this has been sort of interesting. One of the things that was suggested, and we'll hit a
little bit on this, is that maybe this is a little bit harder to distinguish from other viral infections.
Maybe there's a slight difference in clinical presentation, and we'll hit, it's actually the
Scots in the UK is actually an app, the Zoe app in the UK, where when they're looking at symptom
reporting, it looks like they're seeing more sore throats, more runny noses, less of the
classic presentation. Now, I do a call every week with our urgent care docs. I'm sure some of them
are listening. And among our adult populations, I don't think there's enough of the Delta variant
out there that they've really noticed much difference. But last night, it was on a call with Jay
Berger, the head of our large pediatric group. And they're actually still seeing COVID cases
every week. And he was actually saying, in that population, it's always presented with more of a
sore throat, runny nose. So I don't know if it's so much a variant presenting clinically differently,
or if it's just that people are now seeing it in a younger age group, which for I'll say for the
whole pandemic has always presented in a way really difficult to distinguish. And this is a
question I remember like a year plus ago is actually Dr. Mench, one of the medical directors at a
hospital. And he was going through asking all kinds of questions about, well, how can we tell
whether or not it's COVID versus something else? And I was like, you know what, Dr. Mench,
there is one test. It's called the PCR. And I think we're still there. So a lot of attention
back to the early days of the pandemic, which I hope will position us better for the next
zoonotic pandemic. You know, and a lot of this is when when did when did COVID-19 get
into our country? So one of the publications antibodies to SARS-CoV-2 in all of us research
program participants January 2 through March 18, 2020. And this really builds on other work,
including David Hose, serology surveys here in New York City, Washington Heights, Columbia.
And these authors used serum obtained as part of the all of us research program.
This is an observational cohort study that beginning in May 2018 enrolled diverse adults
greater than 18 years of age in the United States from study site locations in all 50 states,
with a goal of enrolling at least a million participants. So relying on serology testing,
these authors reported that they found positive serology for SARS-CoV-2 as early as January 7th
from Illinois, January 8th from Massachusetts, February 3rd from Wisconsin, February 15th from
Pennsylvania, March 6th in Mississippi. And this is really consistent with the paper published
back in the fall serology testing of US blood donations to identify severe acute
respiratory syndrome, coronavirus 2, SARS-CoV-2, reactive antibodies, December 2019 through January
2020 and CID. And that actually they have reported in that paper on SARS-CoV-2 reactive antibodies
saying they had detected them in 106 blood donations from California, Oregon, and Washington
as early as 13 through 16 December 2019. And among donations occurring in early January in
Connecticut, Iowa, Massachusetts, Michigan, Rhode Island, and Wisconsin. So I think this
really goes back, right? I mean, this keeps coming up. They keep talking about the identification
of this in Wuhan, China. And I hate to say when they identified it in Wuhan, China in December,
it was already here in our country, it looks like. So maybe we should take off our hat and say,
thank you for picking up that something was going on because we had it here in our country already.
There actually was a frontline special, PBS frontline special, the virus, what went wrong.
And you can actually hear the story there. And this was made about a year ago about how here we
were in the United States, seeing lots of patients with unexplained respiratory infections.
We were seeing them in community. We were seeing people dying in the hospitals.
We had suspicions that something was going on. We were desperate to be able to sort this out,
but we had no access to testing. We weren't really able to confirm it and tell us the story here
about how it's actually that Westchester patient that we finally were able to get a test result
on February 29th. But he had been sick for a while. And we sort of later realized, boy,
there were thousands of people that already had COVID-19 here in New York by the time we identified
that gentleman in the end of February. Children in COVID, children are at low risk, but they are
not at no risk. And I know people remember my old mantra, let us open the schools if we need to
close the bars. That's fine. So more on children in COVID. And this will be a little bit of an
overlap from, I guess, 769-12, which covered a little bit new information on the article.
This article I'll be talking about incidents of multi-system inflammatory syndrome in children.
Among U.S. persons infected with SARS-CoV-2. This paper was published in JAMA Network Open,
but there's really nice discussion on 769. Not only just about this issue, but maybe a little
deeper dive into maybe some ideas about gut-tight junctions and super antigens. But this article
was really a look at the incidence of multi-system inflammatory syndrome in children. So Miss C,
in those under 21, should they get COVID? So they looked at data from Connecticut,
Georgia, Massachusetts, Michigan, New Jersey, New York. They excluded New York City,
Pennsylvania. And the data analysis was conducted from August to December 2020. And they actually
reported an incidence of 31.6 persons per 100,000 SARS-CoV-2 infections in persons younger than 21.
So this is about one in every 3,000 children who got COVID ended up with Miss C. They did point
out that the Miss C incidence among black persons, Hispanics, and Latino persons was approximately
nine times higher than among Caucasians, about three times higher among Asian Pacific Islanders.
And so I'll suggest this perhaps a lower risk, right? Because as we've discussed before,
many cases in children do go undiagnosed. I just want to add that caveat. But we're starting to
get a, I think, information here, because parents are trying to decide, should I just wait and let
my child get COVID versus the risk that might be associated with vaccinations? So just putting
that in context. Another paper, and this is going to help us with myocarditis discussions,
this paper was prevalence of clinical and subclinical myocarditis in competitive
athletes with recent SARS-CoV-2 infection results from the Big 10 COVID-19 cardiac
registry, right? So this is our university athletes. We'd heard a little bit about this in preprint,
but now this was published in JAMA cardiology. And I think this can give us some perspective,
as concerns are raised about potential risks of heart inflammation or myocarditis post-vaccination.
So the authors here report on a cohort study of 1,597 U.S. competitive collegiate athletes
undergoing comprehensive cardiovascular testing and the prevalence of clinical myocarditis based
on a symptom screening strategy was 0.31%. If they went ahead and screened with magnetic
resonance imaging, it actually was as high as 2.3%. So this gives us a 1 in 300 chance of
symptomatic myocarditis and about a 1 in 43 chance with sensitive screening should
individual in this age group get COVID. So as I say, this is perhaps a lower risk,
because right as we discussed right above, some cases go undiagnosed, so got to have that caveat.
But I think this gives us perspective to concerns about the post-vaccination myocarditis risk,
of which there are a few hundred cases under investigation. They tend to be mild limited to a
few days versus what we see with the virus here, which has actually resulted in long-term impacts.
We actually know a lot of athletes who actually were not able to actually compete because of the
severity of a post-COVID infection myocarditis. So I think this is just more information
for people to have in the mix when they're making decisions about vaccination. I'm talking my
wife a little bit about the sort of discouraging fact that we're still seeing thousands of COVID
cases every day. Most experts are predicting an increase come fall and winter. So you compare
the risk potential risks associated with vaccination versus the real risks of getting COVID and the
complications that we know about from that. But then balancing the risk and perspectives,
what about the impact of the pandemic on mental health issues here in our adolescents? The
article emergency department visits for suspected suicide attempts among persons age 12 to 25 years
before and during the COVID-19 pandemic United States January 2019 through May 2021. Now this
came out as an early release in the CDC MMWR and the authors reported that in May 2020,
during the COVID-19 pandemic ED visits for suspected suicide attempts began to increase
among adolescents age 12 to 17, especially girls. And during February 21 to March 2021,
suspected suicide attempt ED visits were 50.6% higher among girls age 12 to 17 than during the
same period in 2019 prior to the pandemic. And I really think that if you look at
figure one in this paper, it's very sobering as one can see the weekly ER visits for female
adolescents with suspected suicide attempts rising to over 1000 per week. Now the authors
acknowledge several limitations. First, you know, my first tendency is feel guilty that we
caused this through physical distancing, including a lack of connectedness to schools,
teachers and peers, barriers to mental health treatment, increases in substance use and anxiety
about family health and economic problems, which I think we all experienced. These are all risk
factors just for suicide. But we also have seen that the average ED visits for mental health
concerns and suspected child abuse, neglect, risk factors for suicide attempts also increased
in 2020. The authors, you know, acknowledge that there could be alternative explanations here.
But I've talked a bit with our urgent care physicians. And I think a lot of us, a lot of
people have suggested that both this was very evident that there was a significant impact on
mental health that we didn't really need a publication like this. But others have actually
suggested that there's even a bigger problem than we see here. So many visits to urgent care
centers with cutting and other results of mental health challenges in our children,
children struggling in school, parents frustrated and struggling with often very unhealthy parent
child and even parent dynamics. So I was talking to my friend, Dr. Lucy McBride, sort of a,
I think, a bright light in this spot over the last year, just about how we really need to do
better. Alright, pre-exposure period transmission. This was an interesting correspondence in the
Lancet. SARS-CoV-2 Delta, VOC in Scotland, demographics, risk of hospital admission and vaccine
effectiveness. Now, the authors use the word strain a bun. So I'm going to replace that with
the word variant. They report that on May 19, 2021, the Delta variant of concern for 4 million
known as the Indian VOC or B1.617.2 became the dominant variant of SARS-CoV-2 in Scotland.
I wonder how long it's been like prints, how long we have to, you know,
4 million known as throw in there. But the alpha variant of concern had been dominant previously.
I'm not going to give the AKA there. But this was rapidly replaced. A few interesting findings.
So the Delta variant of concern in Scotland was found mainly in younger, more affluent groups.
Interesting. I'm sure about the affluent part of that. Risk of COVID-19 hospital admission was
approximately doubled in those with the Delta VOC when compared to the alpha VOC. Both the Oxford,
AstraZeneca, and the Pfizer by intact COVID-19 vaccines were effective in reducing the
risk of SARS-CoV-2 infection and COVID-19 hospitalization in people with the Delta VOC.
So interesting publication there. All right. Testing never missed an opportunity to test.
This has become a challenging arena and really dealing with false positives,
particularly on asymptomatic screening. So we've done this a few times,
and I'm hoping that clear minds prevail. We get some clinical judgment allowed in terms of
interpretation for our camp, school, and summer programs. So this is the concept of a positive
predictive value and a negative predictive value. So the big message here is that when we get to
a prevalence below 1%, that's where we are in most parts of the country, the majority of those
positive tests are going to be false positives. We're forced in a lot of jurisdictions to still
count any test as positive and follow the rigmarole that follows from that. But we're hoping that
if someone is low-risk, it's screening. You do a secondary confirmatory test that is negative.
We'd love to have just a little bit of flexibility here to use some clinical judgment. But that
is actually what I'm spending a lot of time with. Meetings going through, because there will be.
You do hundreds of tests. You're going to get some positives, and the majority of those are going
to be false positives. All right, active vaccination. Never miss an opportunity to vaccinate. Vaccines
are how this pandemic ends. We heard from Novavax. This was covered on 769. The Novavax COVID-19
vaccine demonstrated 90% overall efficacy and 100% protection against moderate and severe disease
in prevent-19 phase 3 trial. Press release, so we don't have a full peer-reviewed pre-print. But
this is a recombinant nanoparticle protein-based COVID-19 vaccine that uses technology similar to
the current shingles vaccine, shingrix, pertussis, hepatitis B. This, in all honesty, people ask
for, oh, I want a traditional vaccine in many ways. This is. A little bit about the trial,
the catchy name, right? Vincent did a good job of that. Provent stands for the pre-fusion protein
subunit vaccine efficacy Novax trial. This was a two-to-one randomized placebo-controlled
observer-blinded study to evaluate the safety efficacy immunogenicity of this
adjuvanted vaccine in 29,960 participants, 18 years of age and older in 119 locations in the
United States, Mexico, compared with placebo. 70, seven cases were observed, 63 of placebo,
14 in the vaccine group. So remember, this is two-to-one. So you can sort of think of that 63 versus
seven, you know, or 126 versus 14, just to understand why the numbers are what they are.
All cases observed in the vaccine group were mild. 10 moderate cases and four severe cases
were observed all in the placebo group, yielding a vaccine efficacy of 100% against moderate or
severe disease. It's all very positive. Safety data was actually quite positive. And at least
what I have heard is that the people that got the vaccine versus the people that did not get the
vaccine, the degree of reactogenicity was minor enough that people had a tough time telling. So
that will be quite nice if we have a vaccine with a little less reactogenicity. I think it'll be
nice. I'm sure we'll have people wondering if they didn't get placebo in the future. They're
getting used to a nice big reaction. Now they did give us a little bit of information about
variants, but I'm going to sort of leave it there. Another potential great tool for us to have that
looks like it's also efficacious against the variants. All right, pregnant women and vaccination.
It's always a hot topic. CDC MMWR again with COVID-19 vaccination coverage among pregnant women
during pregnancy. That was sort of redundant, but okay. Eight integrated healthcare organizations
U.S. December 14, 2020 through May 8, 2021. And so data from the vaccine safety data link,
so VSD, a collaboration between CDC and multiple integrated health systems was analyzed to assess
those that received greater than one dose or first or second dose of Pfizer BioNTech or Moderna or
single dose of J&J. And basically went through and the really the high point I'm going to say,
they looked at a total of one thousand three one thousand thirty five one hundred and thirty
five thousand yes one hundred and thirty five thousand nine hundred and sixty eight pregnant
women, and they identified no safety concerns. All right, we got more real world data on our
monoclonals. And I like to say the first week, right, the viral symptom phase, the time for
monitoring and monoclonals, and also where you get your test is ideally where you get your monoclonals.
So real world data on bamlin of a map, the article early monoclonal antibody administration
can reduce both hospitalizations and mortality in high-risk outpatients with COVID-19. This was
published in in CID out of UC San Diego at La Jolla. The authors performed a retrospective
review of medical records of patients referred to their clinic from 11 120 to 2 2021 and identified
617 patients at high risk who were offered monoclonal antibodies 175 received them 442 did not.
The monoclonal antibody group was older, more men, more comorbidities, higher risk score,
but despite that there was a significant reduction in hospitalizations in the monoclonal antibody
group versus control 1.7% versus 24%. No COVID-19 related deaths in the monoclonal antibody group,
there were 12 among the controls, which really breaks your heart, right? All these people were
offered monoclonals, a number refused, a dozen of those died as a consequence of that decision.
So I think it's really important for clinicians and patients to realize that particularly in
those unvaccinated monoclonals are a really powerful tool. But now things get a little bit
complicated. This is a twist and I think everyone who is used to everything I've said about monoclonals
and how timing really matters, this is a little nuanced because now we're going to talk about
a subset of hospitalized patients that may actually benefit that do benefit from monoclonal. So we
heard about data from the UK recovery trial. And I have to say, I was very excited about this,
you know, this is stopping people in the hall at the hospital, we got to talk about this.
And this was, we got a press release from Regeneron, Regeneron Cove. So this is the
Casa Veribimab and the MDivimab phase three recovery trial meets primary outcome,
improving survival in hospitalized COVID-19 patients lacking an immune response to SARS-CoV-2.
So the primary outcome was all cause mortality in hospitalized zero negative patients. They
received Regeneron Cove 8000 milligrams versus just usual state of care. And this reduced all
cause mortality by 20% in zero negative patients compared to usual care alone. So 24% of the folks
in the Regeneron COVID arm died versus 30% in the usual care by day 28.
So this is really an important point, right? This is not saying, oh wow, now it works in
hospitalized patients. This is saying that if you give it to people who end up in the hospital,
who missed that first window, remember that first window, nobody died. Here, you still had 24%
of the patients dying. But that was a 20% reduction. When you combine the larger seropositive group,
there was no longer a significant impact. So this is already something where they are looking
for expansion of the EUA. So if a patient shows up in the hospital, maybe their oxygen saturation
is 92, 93, someone might think we need to admit them for a remdesivir or something else. If they
are seronegative, it looks like there still is a benefit in that subgroup to getting Regeneron
cocktail therapy. The median hospital stay was four days shorter, 13 versus 17 in those that
got the cocktail when we're looking at their seronegative group. I'll read there. They had
that quoted summary and this is the takeaway. The recovery trial has shown that in patients who
had not made their own antibodies against SARS-CoV-2 treated with Regeneron-CoV antibodies,
dramatically reduced their risk of dying or being on a ventilator and also shortened how many days
they remained in the hospital. So I think that this is practice changing. But I still will say,
if you can get it in in that first week before they end up in the hospital, we are not seeing
people dying in our trials. We're here a quarter of these people died, but that was less than the
people who do not receive therapy. Long COVID, post COVID, I feel like we're still in a bit of limbo
here, still very limited in what we can offer patients. But we did this week get some guidance
from the CDC. It's both honest, accurate and a start. So let's wrap up today before we get to
emails with some of the key points from the CDC interim guidance on post-acute sequelae of COVID.
So key points, the term post-COVID conditions is an umbrella term for the wide range of physical
and mental health consequences experienced by some patients that are present four or more weeks
after SARS-CoV-2 infection, including by patients who had initial mild or asymptomatic acute infection.
Two, based on current information, many post-COVID conditions can be managed by primary care
providers with the incorporation of patient-centered approaches to optimize the quality of life and
function in affected patients, right? So they're saying here a lot of these people can be managed
by their primary conditions. They do not need to be referred to specialty centers.
The third, and I think this is really important, objective laboratory or imaging finding should
not be used as the only measure or assessment of a patient's well-being. Lack of laboratory or
imaging abnormalities does not invalidate the existence, severity or important of a patient's
symptoms or conditions. I have to admit that particularly one hits close to home. I lately had
a woman who was severely cognitively impaired and the disability decision was basically,
there's no objective lab or imaging abnormalities, so we're going to drop her claim and not continue
to cover her. So I think it's really important that this is recognized. Health care professionals
and patients are encouraged to set achievable goals through shared decision-making and to
approach treatment by focusing on specific symptoms. So for example, if they have a headache or
conditions such as dysautonomia, a comprehensive management plan focusing on improving physical,
mental and social well-being may be helpful for some patients, but then just the honesty at the
end. Understanding of post-COVID conditions remains incomplete and guidance for health care
professionals will likely change over time as the evidence evolves and I'm going to say as we
understand better what is going on and how to help these individuals. We do actually have quite a
bit of a challenge. I'm actually in a meeting almost every day trying to look at how to address
this issue, but we do have challenges because in part it's hard to identify these individuals. We
don't necessarily have a diagnosis code, so we can't look through claims and say, oh, how many people
are, you know, suffering from long COVID, but I wasn't a meeting earlier this week hearing that
there may be a new code. This U09.9 might become active in October and that might allow a physician
to identify this is a person who not just has a new diagnosis after COVID, but may have this post
acute sequelae of COVID syndrome that we're all growing familiar with, the brain fog, the fatigue,
the other disabilities. I will finish there, but then again, thank everyone for your continued
support. I've noticed lately a lot of people are going to Patreon. It's just sort of setting up for
a monthly contribution, which thank you so much. We're continuing through May, June, and July.
Donations made to parasites without borders will be doubled up to a total contribution of $40,000
to Foundation International Medical Relief of Children. This is really a tremendous organization
that's out there helping people in the world struggling. We really want to support them because
we are not safe until everyone is safe. Time for some email questions for Daniel. If you have one,
you can send it to Daniel at microb.tv. Mark writes, wondering if you have seen any cases of PAM as a
vascular stage sequelae of SARS-CoV-2 infection in your practice. PAM. So who knows what PAM is,
paracetral acute middle maculopathy. So this is actually an issue where you have ischemia
to part of the eye. So you have retinal capillary ischemia. And a lot of those patients, this is
well-described, unfortunately, post-COVID. We know that COVID is not just a pulmonary disease. It's a
vascular disease. There's clotting abnormalities. And so these patients are actually being managed
by our ophthalmologist at this point. But yeah, this is a quite a challenge and I think just more
evidence of that COVID is a disease that affects the entire body. So yeah, we actually recently,
it was actually Tuesday night, we went through, we have a COVID recovery clinic here. We set up
here at ProHealth. A lot of institutions have set them up. And a lot of what we do at that intake
is connect patients with specialists that are committed to helping them. So when a person is
seen with this presentation, we connect them with one of our ophthalmologists.
Hi, I'm writes with most indoor spaces, rapidly moving to masks optional. What do I need to do
to best keep my seven-year-old safe? Is his mask enough to protect him, at least for short
exposures? What about longer, like synagogue services, should we just be keeping him away
from all public indoor places other than school for the rest of the year until he can get vaccinated?
So this is an excellent question. I know a lot of people have, you hit on several points in your
question. And one of them, I think a big issue, is a lot of people have not been going to church
synagogue mosque over the last year, or I guess wickin' outdoor circles and I'm gonna leave out
the pagans right there. But you know, there is a risk that has to do with how much virus is in
your community. And so what we're seeing in a lot of communities is an incredibly low
prevalence incidence. And so let's take my immediate area where our test positivity rate is less
than half a percent. These are places where you can start looking around high vaccination rates,
low incidence of virus. You can start doing a risk calculation. There are other parts of the
country where I'm gonna give really the opposite advice, low vaccination, still seeing lots of
infection. So you're gonna have to balance that risk here. The mask really protects us when other
people wear them. There is some protection you get from wearing it yourself. I sort of think of it
as the 80-20 rule. You're getting about 20% of that. By you wearing it, you get about 80% if
everyone else is wearing them. The other is really, as I brought up, vaccination if you're in a place
where people are vaccinated. And again, it's gonna be a sort of threshold risk tolerance.
I actually went to the gym yesterday and I took off my mask for the first time. It felt really
uncomfortable. If I had young children, I think this is really important. Parents need to know
sort of the risks, need to make decisions they're comfortable with. There's a few months left. We
think we're gonna be in September having the ability to vaccinate younger individuals. Parents
should have that as an option. Should they choose it? Come September. So you got to sort of weigh that.
Alina writes, a question regarding a B cell depleted patient with multiple sclerosis in her
40s, last infusion of retuximab, February 2021. First dose of Pfizer April, second dose three weeks
later. In May, some B cells detectable less than 0.5%. Because of a former medication,
there's a T cell deficiency. T cell responses are going to be tested anyway, as well as lymphopenia.
She was tested for antibodies three weeks after the second vaccine dose. They were none at all
detectable. Another round of shots is going to be administered July, hopefully in time before the
next round of retuximab will be needed. Surgery because of a precancerous disease is at the moment
being postponed until after vaccination, but has to happen in full this year at the latest.
Question, what's to be done if the second round of vaccines does not build an immune response?
Could monoclonals be a temporary solution for her for prevention of COVID in high risk settings
like during hospitalization, where masking is not possible? Here in Germany, monoclonals are
not licensed to prevent the use. So there happens to be the practical problem of how to get hold of
them, even as the patient is willing to pay for all medication import transportation. Any ideas
are highly appreciated. This is a great question. We brought up several tests before. There are
millions of patients here in the United States. There are millions and millions of individuals
throughout the world in very similar situations where they've received the vaccine. They don't
have detectable antibodies. It's hard to do the T cell test outside of a research setting,
to be honest. The adaptive T detect is the algorithm for analysis is set up to detect natural
infection, not great for telling us, are you immune? Do you have a T cell shield, so to speak?
The double vaccination people are definitely doing, sort of hear that kind of in there.
A lot of people are giving even at least a third dose. This is all sort of outside. It's
being actively studied at the moment. COVID is different, I got to say. If a person,
I was just going over needle stick injuries yesterday with our frontline physicians. We
tend to say, oh boy, if you were vaccinated and if you have negative serology, then people actually
get immunoglobulin to protect them after acute. There are some studies. Actually,
Regeneron published a preventive study. It makes sense. A lot of the monoclonal antibody
manufacturers are looking at that. Different monoclonal antibodies have different half-lives,
so it makes sense. There is some data to support that. A lot of it here in the US,
I'll be able to share when that is part of the EUA for another indication.
Once something is licensed, as our listeners may know, a physician could choose to use it off-label.
Germany's going to be a particular different challenge, but that is sort of what we think is
on the horizon for individuals that can't make their own antibodies. Potentially, we can give them
those antibodies. And finally, from Jonathan, I'm an internal medicine hospitalist who's getting
revenge against COVID by administering vaccines. I've been heartened to see our clinics here in
San Diego fill up with young adolescents for Pfizer vaccine. However, I'm getting questions
from parents about myocarditis in this population after the vaccine appears that the risk may be
increased. It appears most cases are mild. However, it often helps to discuss these kinds of things
in context. What is the underlying rate of myocarditis in this population? What is the relative risk
of COVID infection versus myocarditis? What are long-term effects or serious outcome percentages
in kids who get this inflammatory state? I can see a parent supportive of vaccination say, hmm,
prevalence of virus where we live now is very low. So why risk having my kid get this vaccine-related
condition? Yeah, no, so this is an excellent question. Hopefully, we've hit on some of the
topics today. And I always frame this for parents that it's really a decision about vaccination
versus getting COVID, right? Things are a little quiet here. We expect to be a little quiet over
the summer. We are expecting to see increases in the fall of the winter. So as my wife says,
boy, with what we're doing, if you don't get vaccinated, it's just a question of when you or
your child get COVID. So that's how I try to weigh it. I say, well, if your child gets COVID,
I think we put the numbers out there. There's about a one in 46 chance that they're going to end up
with myocarditis from the infection itself based upon the athlete study. A lot of those cases will
be a symptom. Actually, you won't even know that. We know that some of those cases have been
severe enough that these athletes have been unable to perform, unable to participate in sports.
So we know about the long, well, already the longer-term effects of natural infection.
But what about vaccination? We've done millions of vaccinations in our country. There are a few
hundred cases of myocarditis under investigation. The vast majority of those have really lasted
for a day or two. They've gotten better with over-the-counter medications. They've resolved
the children have done well. I understand the argument, oh, my gosh, but who knows long-term?
Well, I think we know enough long-term. If you only had a very mild case that
resolved in 48 hours or less, there's really minimal expectation that that's going to do
serious harm to the heart. But boy, if you let your child go ahead and get infected with COVID,
myocarditis is just one of the risks that you would be concerned about.
That's COVID-19 clinical update number 67 with Dr. Daniel Griffin. Thank you, Daniel.
Oh, thank you so much. And everyone, be safe.
