This week in virology, the podcast about viruses, the kind that make you sick.
From Microbe TV, this is Twiv, this week in virology, Episode 772, recorded on June 24, 2021.
I'm Vincent Rackeniello, and you're listening to the podcast all about viruses.
Joining me today from New York, Daniel Griffin.
Hello, everyone. This is number 68, Daniel. And, you know, over a year of updates, it seems to me
that at least here in the US, things are getting better. You know, they certainly are, particularly
in many parts of the US. We still have our regional pockets, a little shout out to Missouri, right,
where the positivity rate is over 6%. So, but areas, I'll say, I was on a call earlier this week where
we were talking about can we start doing nebulizers, things like that, you know, with a little bit
more flexibility. So, nebulizers, if people are not familiar, is where maybe an individual comes in,
they're having trouble breathing. And we actually use a device called a nebulizer, which creates
small particles, right, that can be inhaled that have maybe bronco dilators, medicines that will
open up the airways, help them breathe better. Maybe they're having an asthma attack or a
COPD exacerbation. And we've been hesitant to use those, but we actually were saying, boy,
if a person's vaccinated, if your prevalence is, you know, your test positivity rate is under 1%,
you could start thinking about being a little bit more flexible. I mean, we've always done that
when it's been really severe at an emergency. And one of the people on the call said, that's
pretty strict under 1%, and I was proud to say here in New York, our test positivity rate is under
1%, and we are doing a lot of testing. But that's not true everywhere as we sort of bring up.
All right, so let's start with our quotation, and then let's get right into the thick of it. So,
the quotation, prejudice is a burden that confuses the past, threatens the future,
and renders the present inaccessible. And that's by Maya Angelou. And I like that because I think
that I feel like we all need to keep being reminded that we don't want, we don't want confirmation
bias. We don't want to go into something thinking we know what the truth is. We want to have our
eyes open so that we can actually continue to learn and move forward. Not everything that we
thought we knew a year ago has turned out to be true. And not everything we thought a year ago
that was untrue. That's turned out to be such. So, I think we still need to keep learning. We still
have so much to learn, and we'll get into that as we go forward. But the update really hits home
with Vincent, your first question, which was how are things going? And I'd say this is sort of a
tough day, a tough week on several levels. I don't know if our listeners know, but one of my cows,
my cow, I suppose, and my heifer actually died in Uganda. There was a viral disease. The
hoof and mouth disease was sweeping through Eastern Uganda, which periodically happens. And so my
cow died, which is tragic. I mean, tragic because you care about your animals, but also this was a
cow that was providing seven liters of milk a day to help feed people. And it was even economically.
This is part of the income that was helping to support Mary, my little heifer, who is only about
a year old. So that's difficult, right? For those of us, we talk about how difficult the pandemic
has been. We couldn't go to that bar. We couldn't see that movie. We were trapped in our houses. But
just really to bring home people in Uganda, where the virus is surging again, and there's a vaccine
shortage, this is about not having food. This is about going to bed hungry. Here, though, in the US,
right? Today, I was covering three of the hospitals, and my other partner was covering the other
three, just two of us covering these six hospitals, because one of my partners, Dr. Anujali, was off
attending the funeral of her brother's wife. And this, I think, was tragic. Anujis, sister-in-law,
was in her early 50s. She did not want to get vaccinated because she had learned through social
media that there were microchips in the vaccines. She went ahead, she got infected. Little over a
week later, she ended up in the hospital, intubated, died, leaving behind a husband and her teenage
children. This is just tragic. I think when people make up stuff like these microchips and
all these other crazy things, there's no science there. This is not a scientific debate. It's just
untrue. And that has repercussions. And someone's got to explain to these teenage children that they
no longer have a mom. So, as mentioned, we started our country as a patchwork with different ideas
about and different vaccination rates. Areas with high vaccination rates tend to be the areas with
low COVID. Areas with low vaccination rates tend to be the areas where we're seeing high COVID rates
and hospitalizations and deaths. What we're also seeing, and I'm sort of putting this in right
before the children, but we'll get into this, is that we're actually seeing all those common
winter viruses packed into June. So, now that everyone's taking off their masks, everyone's
celebrating, everyone's getting all the kids together and such, the CDC actually had to issue
an alert regarding a rapid rise in RSV, respiratory syncytial virus, particularly in the south.
But we're also seeing spikes in para-inchluenza, common coronavirus, particularly OC43.
I actually had recently a question from actually a clinician, which sort of shocked me. And they
were asking whether or not I thought the COVID vaccines were causing these people to develop
upper respiratory infections. And there is, I have to say, no way that a COVID vaccination
will give you para-influenza virus or RSV. So, no, this is behavioral. And I think a lot of
times we like to try to blame something else. But no, these viruses are now spreading. We're seeing
a lot of this. And in New York, we're not seeing much COVID-19, but we are seeing a lot of these
ERIs. So, important for people to realize that. Children and COVID, children are at low risk,
but they're not at no risk. So, never miss an opportunity to test. I'm going to jump right
forward here. I don't think this will shock anyone, but it's going to tie right into the
kids again. And this was the article assessing the association between social gatherings and
COVID-19 risk using birthdays. And this was published in Java Internal Medicine. And this was a cross
sectional study using administrative healthcare data on 2.9 million households from the first
45 weeks of 2020. And they found that among households in the top decile of the country,
as far as COVID-19 prevalence, those with birthdays had more diagnoses of COVID-19
compared with households that it had not had a birthday in the two weeks after that birthday was
held. Now, what I will say here is this really was significant in areas where there was a high
incidence of COVID, right? If there's a high incidence of COVID and you have a birthday party,
that's what's going to spread. If COVID incidence is low, they did not see this. And here, and I
think this is a perfect example here in New York, when people are having birthdays and other
celebrations, it's the common coronaviruses. It's RSV. It's the rhinoenteroviruses. It's the
the other common colds that are spreading. And I think that this is critical, right? As people
are making decisions, this really prevalence issue is important as you're making decisions
about what to do. And the other thing that is coming up here, and I'm going to sort of a subtlety
and nuance here, is that we're back in the times of low prevalence and poor positive
predictive value in many parts of our country. So this, people maybe remember that word orthogonal
for orthogonal testing. So if an individual comes in, maybe it's a screening, they're asymptomatic,
they need a negative test for some reason, it comes back positive. If your prevalence is less
than 1%, that's probably false positive. From a medical scientific point of view, you can repeat
that to clarify the picture. But most jurisdictions, the Department of Health is still operating
under the, and I hate these words, abundance of caution. You still need to treat that positive
as a positive. So if that individual is going to be heading off the camp, they've got to wait
those 10 days of isolation. So we'll see where that goes going forward. Active vaccination,
never miss an opportunity to vaccinate. And as I still believe vaccines are how this pandemic ends,
this comes up all the time. So I will touch on it. Maybe this is, I guess, more of interest to
physicians, more of interest to people with immune suppression, but I think it's of interest to
everyone. Another article was published, safety and immunogenicity of a third dose of SARS-CoV-2
vaccine in solid organ transplant recipients, a case series published in the Annals of Internal
Medicine. So a little background with which our regular listeners are probably familiar.
The antibody response after two doses of an M RNA vaccine against SARS-CoV-2 is excellent
in the general population, but can be markedly attenuated or even undetectable in transplant
recipients. So here, the authors reported on 30 patients that received a third dose of vaccine
in 22 patients. Maintenance immunosuppression included cachrolymus or cyclosporin plus mycofenolate.
In addition, corticosteroids were used for 24 patients, ceralymus for one, bilatosept for one,
the median time between transplantation and initial vaccination was 4.5 years. So what did they find?
Well, before they received their third dose of vaccine, 24 of the 30 patients had negative
antibody titers and six had low positive antibody titers. So remember, this is a case series that
we're looking at. The patients received the third dose of vaccine a median of 67 days
after the second dose of that initial vaccine series. So 15 patients received the J&J, the Johnson
and Johnson Janssen, nine received Moderna, six received Pfizer, BioNTech. And what did they find?
Repeated antibody testing a median of 14 days after the third dose, in this case,
a vaccine revealed that of the six patients with low positive antibody titers before the third dose
all had high positive antibody titers after the third dose. In contrast, the 24 patients
with negative antibody titers before the third dose, 25% went on to have high positive titers.
8% had low positive titers, and the remainder, so 67% just remained negative.
This is interesting, and I agree with the author's comments. There were certain limitations here.
I mean, limitations of the study, obvious right off, was this was a small and heterogeneous
convenient sample, and there were no assays for neutralizing antibody, no specific B cell memory,
or T cell response assays. This is interesting. We still need additional trials to determine
whether booster doses to prevent COVID-19 in transphine patients is warranted.
And of course, in my mind, the biggest thing here is we do not have a correlate of immunity
in the antibody test, right? So we keep asking this question, what does it mean if you are vaccinated
and your antibody test is negative? And we still, across the board, say, in general,
don't rush out and get your serology test after vaccination. These vaccinations are incredibly
effective. The conversation I was having with one of the oncologists today is we're not seeing all
these transplant patients, all these people with hematological malignancies who've been
vaccinated ending up in the hospital. So we're actually getting an experience that supports the
efficacy of these vaccines. Another article, and I think this sort of goes into the same area,
on natural infection and protection against reinfection. I have a few comments on this,
but the article is reinfection with SARS-CoV-2 in patients undergoing serial laboratory testing.
This was published in CID. Here, the authors analyzed 9,119 patients with SARS-CoV-2 infection
who received serial tests in total of 62 healthcare facilities in the United States
between December 1, 2019 to November 13, 2020. They identified reinfection in 0.7%
during an average mean of 116 days or about four months, and there were two deaths associated
with reinfections. So the reinfections were associated with a 3.2% mortality. A great discussion
here where they compare their data to the 1.8% reinfection rate seen in the UK siren study,
and that had been published in SARS-CoV-2 infection rates of antibody positive,
compared with antibody negative healthcare workers in England, a large multi-center prospective cohort
study siren that had been published in Lancet back in April. So I did find it interesting that
the infection fatality rate was higher than most of us think, right? Most of us are thinking,
well, if you get reinfected, it'll be more mild, but an infection fatality rate of over 3%.
In this case, a couple of people died in this small cohort. We would not only expect with
improved therapeutics and close monitoring, right? These people are being closely monitored and
picked up early. I would not have expected to see deaths in people who've been previously infected,
and vaccines are available. I know the authors use the word only, but my interpretation is that
in about four to five months after infection, we're already seeing reinfections, we're already
seeing deaths. I think the data has continued to support that vaccines are a little bit better
than just natural infection. All right, the period of detectable viral replication,
the viral symptom phase, what I like to say, the time for monitoring and monoclonals,
and I like to add where you get your test is where you should get your monoclonals.
I have a couple things here before we hit monoclonals. So the first is what about antibiotics, right?
We all know a significant amount of antibacterial therapeutics have been given for this viral disease.
So the article, efficacy and safety of Zithromycin in COVID-19 patients, a systematic review and met
analysis of randomized clinical trials was published in reviews of medical virology. Now,
the authors analysis included seven studies with 8,822 patients. The use of a Zithromycin, that is
an antibacterial antibiotic, the Z-pack, which is quite popular here in the US, was not associated
with an impact on mortality in COVID-19 patients. The use of a Zithromycin was not
associated with an impact on need for invasive mechanical ventilation or length of stay.
The results in this rather large study showed that a Zithromycin as routine therapy in COVID-19
patients is not justified due to a lack of efficacy and potential risk of bacterial resistance.
I thought it was interesting because I looked through the comments and one of the comments was
someone said, you know, we already know this and this doesn't add much to the literature.
But unfortunately, as I pointed out, 88% of people with COVID have ended up getting
antibiotic. So unfortunately, no, people seem not to know this. I recently had a conversation
with someone taking care of a patient in India and the comment was, you know, we really had nothing
to give them except for antibiotics. They said, what do you mean except for antibiotics? They're
like, well, we didn't have oxygen. We didn't have steroids. All we had on hand was antibiotics and
we wanted to give them something. Don't give them antibiotics. That is not giving them something.
That's not helpful. That's like giving them HCQ, hydroxychloroquine. You're going to do harm.
You are not being helpful. This concept that only a minority of patients admitted with COVID
have a secondary bacterial infection. We had another article, characterization of bacterial
and fungal infections in hospitalized patients with coronavirus disease 2019 and factors associated
with healthcare associated infections. This was published in open forum infectious diseases.
And whenever I read a good article, I always remember Steve Goff giving me a hard time asking me if
that was a real journal. So I want to point out, if Steve is listening, that this was published by
the Columbia infectious disease physicians. They're at this prestigious university, Columbia University.
They're in New York City, Magda, Sobiesik. The head of our department was among the authors.
I was actually presenting to the group this morning. So if anyone's listening, I'm reading and
highlighting your article. My colleagues evaluated adult patients diagnosed with COVID-19 between
the 2nd of March and the 31st of May 2020 that had been hospitalized for greater than 24 hours.
They included a total of over 3,000 patients, community associated co-infections when they were
admitted or identified in only 6% of patients. And this is an important point. This is during
that acute inflammatory phase. This is when they're ending up in the hospital. 94% did not have an
acute bacterial infection that would benefit from antibacterial therapy. Later on, and we've
talked about this before, if you continue in the hospital, you can go on to develop a healthcare
associated infection. This is usually in week 2 or 3 of your hospital stay. They did see that
in 12% of these patients. Most of those infections were gram negative bacteria, but also about 20%
were due to fungi. And then as time went on, they were actually seeing more drug-resistant
organisms causing these. Monoclonals can't leave monoclonals out. There's always a little more data.
The article effect of monoclonal antibody treatment on clinical outcomes in ambulatory patients with
COVID-19, also an open form infectious disease. The authors reported when they compared rates of
emergency department visits or hospitalizations among ambulatory COVID-19 patients treated with
monoclonal antibody. That was an N equals 305 versus untreated. That was 6,354. That treatment was
associated with decreased encounters within 30 days. So odds ratio of 0.23. So about a 77%
reduction. So just we keep hitting on this. The most effective thing we can do, if we have missed
that opportunity to get someone vaccinated, is treatment with monoclonals. And as we mentioned
last time, if they show up at the hospital and they're still serology negative, meaning they do
not yet have detectable antibodies, there may still be some benefit, not this dramatic benefit
we're seeing in that first week, but still a little bit in some patients. Early inflammatory
phase, we did get a press release from Gilead. And this was Gilead's remdesivir. I've actually
replaced their brand name with remdesivir all throughout this, but associated with a reduction
in mortality rate in hospitalized patients with COVID-19 across three analyses of large
retrospective real world data sets. So real world evidence from nearly 100,000 hospitalized
patients provides clinical insights on the use of remdesivir for the treatment of COVID-19.
Now this was data was presented at World Microbe Forum. Vincent, I don't know if you were at
if you attended World Microbe Forum. He's shaking head no. Okay. Well, at that
forum, they presented three real world data analysis that included 98,654 patients hospitalized
with COVID-19. So let's let's run through the three trials. So one was the double pine placebo
controlled adaptive COVID-19 treatment trial. So that's ACTT1. And this was looking at hospitalized
patients with COVID-19. There was a trend toward reduced mortality, 11% versus 15%. And the remdesivir
treated patients. So that was an N of 541 compared with the placebo N equals 521. Now in the overall
study population, a trend means this was not statistically significant looking at over 1,000
treated patients. But then they went and did a post hoc analysis. And in this post hoc analysis,
remember this data mining, as I like to say, patients requiring low flow oxygen at baseline
achieved a 70% reduction in mortality that they did claim was statistically significant.
The difference in mortality in the other subgroups was not statistically significant.
I think this plays into our practice, right? We are not giving remdesivir and not
recommending remdesivir for people who come in without the requirement of low flow oxygen.
And we already have some data we were concerned about there once they progress,
once they end up in the ICU or a ventilator that maybe they do worse.
Then we have the real world retrospective comparative analysis from the premier healthcare
database. This looked at mortality and hospitalized patients who were treated with remdesivir.
Bigger numbers here, N equals 28,855 versus matched patients who were not treated. Those were the
N of 16,687. And this looked between August and November of 2020. So the analysis included
adult hospitalized patients treated within the first two days. Patients were matched on
baseline level of oxygenation. And they all stayed in the hospital for a minimum of three days.
The primary endpoint was time to death. And in this large analysis, they report that they saw a
significantly lower risk of mortality in patients that got remdesivir versus those that not across
all severity levels, right? So people coming in with low amounts of oxygen, higher amounts of
oxygen, et cetera. And finally, they referred in this press release to the simple severe study,
which is a randomized open label, multi-center phase three study and hospitalized adult patients
with severe COVID-19, oxygen saturation less than 94% on room air, or receiving supplemental
oxygen and radiological evidence of pneumonia. As the primary objective of the study, five-day
and 10-day dosing durations of remdesivir, they did not include a standard of care
comparator arm when they initially set this up. But then ahead, the retrospective real-world
analysis that was presented at the WMF compared mortality outcomes of hospitalized patients who
received remdesivir in the open label extension phase, right? So they continued this study into
an open label extension phase. Here we had in that an N of 1,974, and then they created a propensity
score weighted comparator arm. Patients not treated with remdesivir was an N of 1,426.
The primary endpoint was time to all cause death, and the analysis found that in the overall population,
treatment with remdesivir was associated with a statistically significant mortality risk,
at 28 days versus those not treated, again, regardless of the baseline oxygen requirement.
So getting just a little bit, I'm starting to feel a little bit better about all the
money and resources we're putting on remdesivir, but these are huge numbers needed to show a
significant impact. So do you use remdesivir on your patient? So we still do, and there's really
a window in a sense of when we consider it, and so this is not giving it to every patient who walks
in the door, only patients who have an oxygen requirement or are oxygen saturation less than
94% in room air, and then not giving it to people with advanced disease who require mechanical
ventilation. But in that little window, we are doing five days of treatment. And I guess I'll
throw in the caveat, Vincent, if that person is getting better, we're not keeping him in the
hospital for that extra day for day five. If they're getting better, we let them go,
again, not feeling like that extra day in the hospital is worth getting an extra one or two days
of remdesivir. But at the same time, you're probably giving them monoclonals, right?
Well, so that's the challenge, right? So again, it's all back to our timing. If they show up
within the first seven to 10 days, we're giving them monoclonals and a 70%, 80% reduction in them
even coming to the hospital. If they do come to the hospital, the data would now say if they
show up and there's still serology negative have yet to mount an antibody response, monoclonals are
still potentially of some benefit. But that's the group that we're looking at at remdesivir.
So it's after the first week, we're getting into the second week, they're starting to get some
degree of hypoxemia. That's when we're giving them remdesivir. Got it.
It is interesting, right? Because you would think we'd want to give it during that first week.
Yes. You know, right? It's an antiviral. Let's give it when they have. But interesting enough,
we have not been able to show. And I think it's because we don't know in that group, right? 97%
of people are going to survive probably 80% or not even going to progress to need the hospital.
So you end up treating so many people who probably don't need exposure to remdesivir.
So now I'm going to jump to the long phase, long COVID. I'm going to try to keep these
down to 30 minutes. People have been letting me know we've been getting a little long.
And then maybe that's okay. Here we are at long COVID. But a couple things I want to say at the
end. And this is really important. If you're a clinician, pause it here, get yourself a pen and
some paper, be ready to go back to this. It's really critical for us as far as long COVID to
know who has it. And this, as silly as it seems, we need to have this coded so that people can look
through and see, hey, we're starting to see a lot of people with long COVID. So what have we heard?
I talked a little bit about this last time is we got some guidance from the CDC. So we have a code
on the horizon. This is U09.9 post COVID-19 condition code, not yet available in the US,
but we expect it to be available in October 2021. In the meantime, when you see someone
more than four weeks after acute COVID, they're still continuing to suffer. The CDC is recommending
we use the code B 94.8 sequelae of other specified infectious and parasitic diseases.
We really need to start tracking who are these people? Where are they? What resources do they need?
This is really a huge issue. It's a huge issue for the millions of people that are still suffering.
It's a huge issue for the employers. It's a huge issue for us as a society. So it's really
important that we're able to identify who these people are so that we can connect them with the
resources they need. And one of the resources they need is research. And so I do want to offer a
bit of hope to all these individuals suffering with long COVID. It's unfortunate that this is
impacting so many people, but the other side of that is it is impacting so many people. This
cannot and will not be ignored. There's a tremendous amount of research and medical attention being
put on this topic. So I'm really optimistic in the coming months. We'll be sort of shifting
some of our discussion away from vaccinations and monoclonals to what are the therapeutics
for these individuals who got COVID before we could prevent it or even who got COVID after we
could prevent it and are still suffering from long COVID. So before we hit emails, I will say
please take a moment. Through the months of May, June and July, we are continuing to
help support Foundation International Medical Relief of Children. They operate throughout the
world, South America, the Pacific, India, Africa. These places are really having a tough time.
You know, when you're planning that big celebration, maybe take a moment and send a few
dollars to parasites without borders so we can continue to help.
Daniel, what happened to the observation in the long COVID patients that vaccination
seemed to help some of them? So we are still seeing that in about 40% of patients. I should
mention that they are doing a study up at Yale, COVIDRecovery, at Yale.edu. I'm waiting for a
little bit more science, but we just keep seeing this clinically. We're seeing not quite half,
but a little less than half of patients who have the brain fog, the loss of smell, the fatigue.
You know, if you have pulmonary scarring, if you've had heart damage, if you had a stroke,
the vaccine isn't going to is going to undo the permanent damage. But it continues to be
encouraging seeing patients that have had this. I guess the next question, I think about the
renal transplant, the people that, you know, 25% got better with the first dose. We get up to 40%
with the second dose. Do we give them a third dose? I'm looking forward to studies on that.
And also, this will be an interesting population to look at, do antivirals work in these people?
Is this being driven by viral persistence? Or is it a pure immunological issue? So
I'm looking forward to some more insights into this.
Time for some email questions. If you'd like to send one to Daniel, it's Daniel at microbe.tv.
Jenny writes, I got J&J vaccine back in March. Recently, I heard on the news that J&J vaccine
is less effective against Delta variant than any two dose vaccines. I'm wondering if I should
consider getting a second dose Pfizer Moderna to increase my protection against Delta variant from
60 to 80%. So that's, I have to say, that's a great question. And a lot of people are asking it.
The party line, I'm going to give you the party line first, but then we'll go into the
week. So the party line is all of these vaccines are incredibly effective. Even should you get
COVID after vaccination, it goes from being a severe life threatening disease to maybe the
sniffle, something mild in most cases. The subtleties would be, if you said, oh, but I'm 80 years old,
and I have multiple comorbidities, and I'm homebound and I don't have a good care network,
then you start thinking about it. But in general, the vaccines are all incredibly
effective. We're not recommending that someone who is vaccinated with J&J go ahead and get an
mRNA vaccine. David writes, I'm especially vulnerable to COVID as the result of age
in a number of underlying conditions that was vaccinated in February was beginning to feel
freer in what I could do until I read a newspaper article reporting on a study finding that even
low doses of prednisone could dramatically reduce antibody production from the vaccine.
I was taking five migs of prednisone at the time. I was vaccinated for an autoimmune lung disease.
I took the antibody test and the result was that there were no detectable antibodies.
My doctor informs me that I probably still have some protection through other mechanisms,
but there's no way of knowing if this is the case or how significant the other protections are.
Dr. prescribing prednisone has told me I could stop it temporarily to get
re-vaccinated. If I do this and then resume the prednisone, are the antibodies likely to be
suppressed? Is there any way of measuring what degree of protection I have absent
measurable antibodies? Any advice for me? We keep hitting on this with the literature,
and I keep bringing up these articles because people really care. We have a majority of our adult
population now vaccinated, and people want to know did it work. A lot of our other vaccines have
titis B. Even though we don't think it's the antibodies that give you the protection, we think of it as a correlate.
You can measure that. A lot of people are asking these questions. A couple of things I'll say
they're encouraging. One is five milligrams of prednisone is actually quite a low dose
compared to what we're seeing in other populations. As I mentioned my discussion with the oncologist,
we are not seeing a lot of individuals like you end up coming in as vaccine breakthroughs that
end up in the hospital. We do think that the vaccines continue to be quite effective.
Now, what about your doctor's strategy that he's bringing up? Stopping the prednisone for a
period of time, let's say two or three weeks, getting vaccinated. This is something we did a lot of
times upfront as if we could. We would stop immunosuppressive medicines. We would have a person get vaccinated,
and then once they had finished the series, then they would potentially be resumed.
I think that's a reasonable strategy, but again, it gets back to this issue. The vaccines are
incredibly effective. We are not seeing individuals like you end up in the hospital. So maybe we're
still underselling the vaccines across the board. The incidence is going down. The prevalence is
going down. This is getting to be a safer time. At least for the next couple months, you have some
time to think about this. If we start seeing rates go up or let's say you live in an area with a
high prevalence, that's going to be a slightly different metric.
Finally, Mark writes, I'm a clinician and past clinical researcher who's been involved with
chronic fatigue syndrome since the mid-80s. I've seen and helped manage around 5-6,000 people with
CFS all the way from near permanently bedbound patients to impaired Olympic athletes in both
inpatient and outpatient settings. The story of many long COVID patients is, to me, indistinguishable
from my post-IBV, post-Dangy, and post-Rosse river viral cases here in Australia. In many of these,
a specific viral IgM remains raised, and abnormalities of tick lymphocytes keep supporting a hypothesis
of persistent immune failure to bring the infection to an end. The few COVID-19 patients with persistent
symptoms I have seen show the same immunology changes, although I know that this is a very
small sample and likely selection bias. We'd have very few cases in Australia so far,
but that will change with opening of our borders and our low vaccination rates.
My question is, could long COVID be a specific instance of CFS? No diagnostic tests, a wide range
of symptoms and disability? No clear mechanism identified a lack of disease, classification,
impairing care? You raised dysautonomia as one component, and this is especially common in
young people with CFS. Treatment for postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome POTS is well
established and does provide considerable reduction of disability for many while we await deeper
understanding of these conditions. Cheers from Australia. So these are actually really excellent
points all across the board, and there certainly are similarities in this population. One of the
things we learned from the CFS population was that a subset, if you try to just exercise them
up, so to speak, rehabilitate them treated as an issue of deconditioning. You actually can make
them worse. So we see a very similar pattern in a subset of these patients. The POTS, the
dysautonomia, there actually are a lot of similarities between these populations. That might be good,
it might be bad. One of the troubles we realize is that there was a lot of research at one point
looking at CFS, trying to figure out what was going on, trying to introduce helpful therapies,
and we did not make a lot of headway. So I know some people are looking at this and saying,
oh my gosh, is this the next CFS. But here's the big difference when I have those conversations,
is people got this all at the same time. I'm actually hoping it's the other way,
is that now, since we had a large number of people get infected at the same time, we all sort of know
when the onset was, that we're going to get insights into long COVID that can allow us to go back to
the chronic fatigue syndrome patients. I do suspect there at least are certain patients that have
similar mechanisms underlying this. I was going to throw chicken guñas, another one of those post
viral syndromes that we see. So yeah, I continue to be optimistic, but I think everything you said
there was really insightful. That's COVID-19 clinical update number 68 with Dr. Daniel Griffin.
Thank you, Daniel. Thank you, Vincent. Thank you, everyone, and be safe.
