This week in virology, the podcast about viruses, the kind that make you sick.
From MicrobeTV, this is Twiv, this week in virology, Episode 775, recorded on July 1st, 2021.
I'm Vincent Racken Yello, and you're listening to the podcast all about viruses. Joining me
today from New York, Daniel Griffin. Hello, everyone. So Daniel, President Biden said,
by July 4th, we'd have 70% of the US immunized. Has that been achieved?
No, we're not quite there. We're falling a little short. And it's regional. We're falling short
in different regions and kind of look at a map. And you can see where those regions are. And you
really just look at the incidence of COVID-19. And you know those areas with low vaccination uptake.
So yeah, we didn't quite hit there. I mean, we're doing, we're doing decent. You know, could be worse.
So you worse could be better, right? It could definitely be better. I'm sorry that it's not
better. Yeah, I mean, I, I had a woman I saw just yesterday, you know, Haitian to sad,
had moved to the United States when she was younger. And she ended up in the ER. And I was
talking to her a little bit about why she had not gotten vaccinated. And you know, there's a lot
of this misinformation. She had been told that there was bad stuff in the vaccines. And in in
15 years, we would all be dead. So it's hard to fight against that because apparently we have to
wait 15 years to see. But no, I mean, you know, here's a woman who's sick. And I think we talked
about my partner's sister-in-law who died leaving behind children. Yeah, I mean, they're, unfortunately,
this misinformation is not innocent. It, it results in people getting sick, people dying. So so a lot
has happened this week. I have to say, so Vincent and I, and to our listeners, I, you know, right
after I record one episode, I start taking notes for the next one. I see an interesting article that
came out. Sometimes I get to the end of the article and I realize I don't like that, delete that.
Something more interesting comes up. And I keep thinking, boy, eventually like the firehose of
information will settle down and we'll go to this month in clinical updates, but there just seems
there's so much information. So let's jump right into it. My quotation, courage is not the absence
of fear, but rather the assessment that something else is more important than fear. And actually,
Peter Hotez tweeted that out. That's FDR. And I think he tweeted it out. You know, my sort of
heart and sympathy goes down to so many science educators, like yourself, Vincent, like Peter,
who are just trying to to spread knowledge to educate. And there's really a bit of a backlash,
which is more than vile at times. So I know this is really tough. So I applaud the courage of all
the people that continue to to educate despite that backlash. I will say before I get into my
episode, I really love the tweet of episode 773 with Lori Garrett. Certainly no shrinking
violet brought lots of passion. I love her books. So, you know, it's summertime, right? People go
to the beach. They read books. They go to the lake. They have some time sitting on the back porch.
These, these are great, great books and very, very timely while written.
All right. So let me start. And I'm actually going to touch on a few controversial topics.
This week, there was a guest essay. Human behavior during the pandemic is more important than any
COVID variant. And I don't know if people ran across this, but this was written by a Dr.
Rosenfeld and a Dr. Rachin Yellow. Yes. Same Amy and Vincent that our listeners might know.
And the article really does an excellent job of making the point that I'll be touching on today.
So ultimately, a virus has a genetic sequence that changes. And these changes can, they can be
neutral. They can be favorable. They're usually unfavorable in terms of viral fitness. And this
is my sort of request to the audience and the media to start using the word fitness, rather than
transmissibility. And this viral fitness is really the same Darwinian concept that underlies the
whole survival of the fittest that many of us learned about if we were allowed to be taught
that in our schools. And reproduction is a chance for an organism to end up with improved fitness.
And we have certainly given SARS-CoV-2 the opportunity to reproduce. And it's not surprising
that we are seeing that the delta variant, that there's evidence to suggest that it has
improved fitness, that it's going to have the ability to out-compete other viruses.
And I know I drive some of even the other ID docs a little bit crazy in, you know, sort of focus
on, let's say, things that are true. Let's use the right terminology. But I'm going to push on
that and let's just spend a little time here before I get into other sort of bits in the literature.
But take some time and read that article. Vincent hopefully will post it up on the
Parasites Without Borders website. But let's sort of go through this together. What factors can
improve a virus's or a variance fitness? What changes would be favorable? And I'm going to try
to avoid anthropomorphism. And I think I'm going to succeed. So everyone can listen and comment
if they catch me. But a virus can change in a way that increases the duration of viral shedding,
right? So a person could perhaps shed virus for a longer period of time before they became
symptomatic or before they become symptomatic. Maybe they can continue to shed viable infectious
virus for a longer period post symptom onset. And this might involve some changes that impact
the interaction with the immune system. A virus can mutate in a way that increases the level
of this infectious virus shedding. A person could perhaps shed virus at a higher level, right? And
we've talked about CT values. Even more than that, we've talked about how you don't just need a lot
of RNA, but you actually need viable virus. So a little harder to look at that. A virus could change
in a way that allows for infection of the next host with a lower inoculum, right? And people have
talked about maybe improved affinity to the receptor. So lower inoculum resulting in infection.
A virus can change in a way that modifies its tropism for lower down in the airways,
potentially increasing the degree to which it's contained in smaller droplets that's been
discussed on a prior Twiv. Or maybe it can modify its tropism to start involving more of the
upper airways. More runny, drippy noses, maybe more sneezing. A virus can change in a way.
And I'm going to sort of focus on this, where it can allow it to re-infect previously infected
people. People that thought they had natural protection, maybe had natural protection against
one of the early variants. But perhaps now changes. Maybe that sweet spot in the receptor
body domain changes enough that those natural antibodies no longer target as well. Maybe the
T cells aren't up to the challenge. Or a virus might change in a certain way that decreases its
susceptibility to antiviral medications or vaccination. So I think that these are all reasonable.
And I think that I'm going to sort of keep asking people. And I think it's for the media,
right? The virus is becoming more fit. We have a fitness increase in the variants.
I think that's exciting. People can read that, I think.
Now, we do have concerns with the Delta variant that in addition to re-infecting the previously
infected, there's evidence, such as the report from Scotland that I discussed last time,
that the Delta variant may be associated with an increased risk of hospitalization,
death, and seems to be infecting younger individuals. So let's just go through a few of these. But
what I'm going to do is jump to the escape from vaccines and therapeutics. Let's get some science
here. So I'm just not another person with two thumbs and an opinion. So we got new information
from Moderna in the form of the press release. Moderna provides a clinical update on the neutralizing
activity of its COVID-19 vaccine on emerging variants, including the Delta variant first identified in
India. But they also released the data as a preprint. So let's jump to the preprint,
right to the preprint serum neutralizing activity of mRNA 1273 against SARS-CoV-2 variants, right?
So this is the Moderna vaccine. The authors reported that Sira from participants immunized
on a prime boost schedule, right? So first shot, then you four weeks later with Moderna get the
second shot, had neutralizing activity against several SARS-CoV-2 variants, including variants of
concern and variants of interest. And this was compared to the D614G. So the wild type SARS-CoV-2
as a referent. They showed that there were minimal effects on neutralization against, and I'm going
to, we're going to go with the Greek here against the alpha variant, only a 1.2-fold reduction.
The other VOCs, they looked at beta, gamma, delta, and you saw between a 2.1 and an 8-4-fold
reduction. So what they were describing as small reduction, but little detail here.
The participants were immunized. The Sira was collected seven days post-boost. They only
analyzed eight participants. And these assays were done using pseudovirus,
not real stuff in a BSL-3. So just to put that in context.
What about other vaccines, comparison? We have data from the UK suggesting that the Pfizer
BioNTech vaccine was 88% effective against symptomatic disease from the delta variant
two weeks after the second dose, compared to 93% effective against the alpha variant.
Two doses of the AstraZeneca, not as impressive, 60% effective against symptomatic disease
from the delta variant compared to 66% compared to the alpha variant.
Both vaccines. I think people may know this. We're only about 33% effective after just one dose,
which is where many of us peg natural infection. The J&J efficacy is largely unknown. So I know
I get a lot of questions here. Like now that we have the delta variant, what's the role of J&J?
I have to say here in the US, we're very fortunate. The vast majority of our vaccination campaign
has utilized the mRNA, the Moderna, and the Pfizer vaccines. And we're seeing the real world data
from Pfizer BioNTech. Now we're getting a little more data on Moderna as well.
All right, children, COVID, and mental health. I'm going to lump it all in there.
As I like to say, children at low risk, but they are not at no risk. I had a great conversation.
It was actually yesterday with Dr. Melissa Stockwell. She's one of the few experts in pediatric
COVID. And she's right there, right here at Columbia University Medical Center.
And it was really an interesting conversation we had. I've been working at the United Health
Group level to try to identify referral centers for individuals with difficulty. And one of the
biggest challenges is finding centers that have experience and a focus on children.
So we were discussing a bit of her experience with regarding long COVID in children. And her
suggestion was that we may have underestimated how much long COVID is impacting children.
And she says she's starting to see in the recent few weeks here, as the children leave school,
try to get out there and exercise and get involved in activities. A lot more parents are noticing
that their children are struggling. We had a little conversation, how much of that is post-acute
sequelae of COVID versus post-acute sequelae of a pandemic. So there'll be more on this as we go
forward. But just to keep this in mind, a lot of these younger individuals still do not have the
opportunity to get vaccinated and certain parts of our country still have actually
unacceptably high infection rates. As I mentioned, mental health, the pandemic has had a significant
impact on mental health. I discussed the issue in adolescent girls, actually, a significant
increase in them ending up in the emergency room. But we had an MMR early release from the CDC,
symptoms of depression, anxiety, post-traumatic stress disorder, and suicidal ideation among
state, tribal, local, and territorial public health workers during the COVID-19 pandemic,
the United States marched through April of 2021. Now, the authors reported they looked at 26,174
public health workers, 53 percent reported symptoms at least one mental health condition
in the two weeks prior to the survey. Symptoms were most prevalent among those who were unable to
take time off or who were working greater than or equal to 41 hours per week. So the majority of
public health workers surveyed were reporting mental health issues. The reported symptoms of
depression, 32 percent, anxiety, 30 percent, PTSD, 37 percent, suicidal ideation was as high as 8.4 percent.
The highest prevalence of a mental health condition was among respondents aged less than or equal
to 29 and among transgender and non-binary persons of all ages. The authors do comment
that the findings of this report have certain limitations. I thought the most important that
they mentioned was that the participants were surveyed only about symptoms experienced in the
two weeks preceding the survey. So it doesn't reflect all the stress and all the difficulties
over the last 18 months, sort of a snapshot here, but an incredibly troubling snapshot.
And I think this reinforces what we're seeing all across the healthcare sector. We're seeing
individuals struggling with mental health challenges due to stress, financial insecurity,
loss. I mean, a lot of people have lost loved ones, jobs, other things. And I really appreciated
a piece by my friend Lucy McBride published in The Atlantic. I need to subscribe. By now,
burnout is a given. Just discussing how we're seeing this in so many healthcare providers,
but we're no special class. We're seeing this all across our society. So mental health is health.
All right. I would like to say testing never miss an opportunity to test. We still need to
keep doing testing. And particularly with the suggestion that we may now see presentations
that are less typical than we're used to at individual today who went to an urgent care center
with a chief complaint of, I think I have sinusitis. I'm feeling all this fullness in my sinuses,
tested positive for COVID ended up in the emergency room. We confirmed that that was COVID. This
gentleman is now hypoxic in the hospital. And really the presentation was sinusitis,
which quickly then evolved into hypoxemia and pulmonary involvement. All right, active vaccination
never miss an opportunity to vaccinate. And vaccination is how this pandemic ends.
Lots here this week. The article correlates of protection against symptomatic and asymptomatic
SARS COVID-2 infection was posted as a preprint by a number of authors and the Oxford COVID
vaccine trial group. So data from a randomized efficacy trial of the Chadox AstraZeneca vaccine
in the UK were analyzed to determine the antibody levels associated with protection against SARS
COVID-2. So drumroll here, we all want to know this. Can I get a blood test? Can I find out?
Am I protected? So they looked at any spike in anti-receptor binding domain IgG
by multiplex amino assay. They used pseudovirus and live neutralizing, like that used the word
live in this virology paper. I should say active neutralizing antibody at 28 days after the second
dose. And they looked at infected, non-infected vaccine recipients. And they reported that higher
levels of all immune markers correlated with a reduced risk of symptomatic infection. But
antibody responses did not correlate with overall protection against asymptomatic infection.
So the authors reported that they had data for anti-spike and anti-receptor binding domain IgG
from 1,318 individuals. They had 163 cases, 1,155 non-cases. Interesting, but still very
preliminary. I'm not sure we have all the answers. This data is only for the AstraZeneca vaccine.
It only looked at responses, any predominantly Caucasian population in the UK, when only the
alpha variant was circulating. And as noted, no correlation was seen with higher levels of
antibody and protection against asymptomatic infection. And we do know that we can get
transmission with asymptomatic infection. Now people that unfortunately have to tolerate
me in person on a regular basis have probably grown tired of. I always find a way to insert
the word heterogenous into conversations, one of my favorite words. But now we now have a study
published in the Lancet about heterogenous vaccinations, mix and max, max, mix and max. See,
heterogenous, so much easier to say. Immunogenicity and reactogenicity of BNT162B2 booster
in Chadox primed participants, CombiVacS, a multi-center open label randomized controlled
phase two trial. So the authors reported on this randomized control trial on adults aged 18 to 60
vaccinated with a single dose of the Chadox AstraZeneca vaccine, eight to 12 weeks before
screening, no history of prior infection. And then the participants were randomly assigned to either
get the Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine via a single intramuscular injection, or just to continue
observation, a control group. And the primary outcome was 14-day immunogenicity measured
by immunoassays for SARS-CoV-2 spike protein and receptor binding domain. So here again,
we're measuring antibody levels, right? We just got a little bit of sense that maybe there's some
correlation we might have there. So 676 individuals were enrolled, randomly assigned to either intervention
at five university hospitals in Spain's was done in Spain. In the intervention group,
the receptor binding domain antibodies increased from 7.46 up to 7,756. As far as the IgG against
trimeric spike protein, this increased from 98.4 to 3,684.87. Reactions were mild to moderate
some injection site pain, not infection, injection site pain, some induration. About 44% of the
people said they developed a headache. About 43% felt the muscle aches, no serious adverse
events. But basically, they were showing that we were seeing a significant rise in antibody levels
using this mix and match or heterogeneous vaccine approach. And I know we get a lot of questions
because in certain parts of the world, AstraZeneca was rolled out and then they pulled it back and
then people are getting other vaccines. What I don't know if I can comment on here is this is
just getting one dose of the mRNA vaccine. The current recommendation is still, let's say you
come to the US and you've only had one AstraZeneca vaccine, we recommend just restarting and doing
two shots of the mRNA. So this is the kind of data that might factor into those recommendations.
All right, now if a person had COVID-19 previously, should they get one or two doses of a two dose
vaccine? Certainly controversial. The report prior SARS-CoV-2 infection rescues B and T cell
responses to variants after first vaccine dose was published in science. And we've been hearing a
lot about this issue. And it may be helpful in many areas of the world that already have
significant number of prior infections, more limited numbers of available vaccine doses
to sort of know, can we take people who had COVID before and just give them one vaccine? Do we need
to use two twice the resources? The authors analyzed T and B cell responses after first dose
vaccination with the Pfizer, BioNTech mRNA vaccine in healthcare workers. They followed
them longitudinally. These were people that had previous infection. After one dose, individuals
with prior infection showed enhanced T cell immunity, antibodies secreting memory B cell response,
and neutralizing antibodies against the variants. I think that all this is interesting. And to be
honest, does build on what we know. This is actually, I'll say a rather dense, interesting paper,
perhaps on immune or some immunologist will do a deeper dive into this. But I'm not sure this is
so far or at the point where this is practice changing information, but we are learning more.
This may also impact that WHO has forecast that certain vulnerable high risk individuals
may need yearly COVID shots vaccines. There won't be COVID in the shots. There will be vaccine in
those shots. You know, if richer countries feel they need boosters for some of their citizens,
then this, again, will affect equity issue. I do want to remind all the listeners how effective
these vaccines are, even in people with negative serology tests. I want people to everyone to run
out and get those serology tests. In the last month, there have been more than 18,000 deaths
from COVID here in the U.S. And over 99% of those were in unvaccinated individuals.
All right. In the New England Journal of Medicine, we saw effect of vaccination
on household transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in England. And this is really, I think,
addresses the critical issue. People come up all the time. If I've been vaccinated,
can I transmit the virus to other people? This really is critical because the whole concept of
community immunity relies on vaccines interrupting transmission. And this is that question,
is there free lunch for the unvaccinated? So the authors analyzed data from the household
transmission evaluation data set hosted, which is information on all laboratory confirmed cases
of COVID-19 in England. As you can imagine, it's a very large data set. So between January 4th,
February 28th, 2021, there were 960,765 household contacts of unvaccinated index patients,
and there were 96,898 secondary cases of COVID-19. The authors compared the risk of secondary
infection defined as a positive SARS-CoV-2 test two to 14 days after the positive test for the
index case among unvaccinated household contexts of vaccinated persons with the risk among unvaccinated
household contexts of unvaccinated persons with infection. And they reported, drumroll,
that vaccination was associated with a 40 to 50% reduction in transmission of SARS-CoV-2.
Now, there's a couple things I will say there. One is they are through their contact tracing,
confirming that vaccinated people who get infected can still transmit it to other individuals.
I was a little underwhelmed, I guess 40 to 50% reduction in transmission. I had hoped
for better. That is not as much as I would like. But remember, this is only the second step in
the process. The first step in the process is a vaccinated person has to get infected. And we
already have, well, good information on symptomatic infection. We're getting better information as
time goes by on the decrease impact of any asymptomatic infection. But just to keep in mind,
a vaccinated person is not 100% safe. If they get infected with SARS-CoV-2, they are less likely,
but not zero. All right. Now, the next question I get all the time, how long will my vaccine
induced immunity protect me? Will I need a booster shot? And the article SARS-CoV-2,
mRNA vaccines induce persistent human germinal center responses, was published in nature.
And again, this is a rather deep, complex article. The flow cytometry for all the immunologists in
the audience are very nice. I'm sure they had to do a lot of flow cytometry to get such nice
flow plots. But what the researchers did here is they examined fine needle aspirates. Explain
what that is. You take a small needle and you actually put it into a lymph node, and then you
draw back on a syringe, you're actually obtaining cells. They did this from 14 individuals from the
draining axillary lymph nodes. So you can think about you're getting your vaccine in your deltoid,
in your arm, and then they're checking the lymph nodes under the arm, in the armpit.
They identified germinal center B cells that bound S protein in all participants sampled
after primary immunization. They reported that high frequency of S binding germinal center B
cells and plasma blast were sustained in these draining lymph nodes for at least 12 weeks after
the booster immunization. And they suggested that these findings supported the idea that SARS-CoV-2
mRNA based vaccination of humans might induce a persistent germinal center B cell response,
enabling the generation of robust umeral immunity that might be rather durable.
So this is interesting. It's a cause for optimism. But we still need some more data to before we
hang our hat on this. Now this, this was kind of a late one coming in, but I think exciting.
Um, we saw the New England Journal medicine publication safety and efficacy of NVX COV-2373
COVID-19 vaccine. Um, that's the Nova Vax, the protein based vaccine. The, as I've liked to say,
the honest traditional vaccine that we've been using for many years for for shingles vaccination,
shingrix, pertussis hepatitis B. And here in the New England Journal of Medicine, we saw the
peer-reviewed publication of the Phase 3 randomized observer-blinded placebo control trial conducted
at 33 sites in the UK. Um, individuals, adults ages 18 to 84 in a one-to-one ratio to receive
two intramuscular immunizations or placebo administered 21 days apart. The primary efficacy
endpoint was biologically confirmed mild, moderate or severe COV-2, SARS-CoV-2 infection,
with an onset of at least seven days after that second injection, um, in participants who were
serologically negative at baseline, right? So these are people that had not been infected,
were immunized. Um, the two-dose, um, Nova Vax vaccine, um, conferred 89.7% protection,
against SARS-CoV-2 infection, and, um, showed high efficacy against the alpha variant. Uh,
the incidence of serious adverse events was low. And actually, I thought this was interesting. Um,
it was very hard for individuals to be able to tell whether or not they were in the placebo
or the vaccine group. So this has a lot less of that reactogenicity, um, that we've grown
accustomed to. Um, we hear rumors that Nova Vax is going to be, um, putting this forward to the FDA,
this quarter, sort of the corporate approach to the world. So this quarter will be, I guess,
July, August, September. Um, so this will be an exciting, um, addition. Um, and, and I think it,
it will make a difference. There's a lot of individuals that I talked to that are waiting
for this vaccine. Um, so I think if we can give people options and that option then,
um, ends up with them vaccinated. Um, I'm all for choices. The time, the period of detectable
viral replication, right? That first week that viral symptom phase, the time for monitoring
and monoclonals. And as I like to say, where you get your test is where you should be able to get
your monoclonals. Um, U S health officials on Friday, February 25th, pause the distribution
of Eli Lilly's COVID 1980 body cocktail therapy, um, with concerns about a lack of effectiveness
against the beta and gamma corona variants. Um, the FDA recommended use of the Regeneron
cocktail, um, and the, via GSK therapy instead of this combination therapy. Um, all of the
assays to date would suggest that those other monoclonal therapies, um, continue to be effective.
Um, just some sort of real world. Um, the government has purchased a lot of the Regeneron cocktails.
They're sort of out there sitting on shelves. Um, I have not seen much uptake with the
via GSK yet. Um, and I'm still waiting to find out will the government purchase that? Um,
will that be something that health insurance companies are expected to reimburse? What are
the on the ground issue differences? Um, Regeneron is frozen, must be thawed. Um, you can do IV,
or as we now know, sub queue with four injections. Um, and then there's a two hour observation
period. Uh, the via GSK can be in the fridge. Um, it can be a 30 minute infusion with a one
hour wait time. So may have a certain role in that doctor's office that busy urgent care.
And since a lot of people have decided, um, not to get vaccinated, uh, there will continue
to be a first week of COVID. All right. Early inflammatory phase, right? These are those
individuals. The oxygen saturation drops below 94%. Uh, they end up in the hospital. We have steroids.
We have oxygen. We have remdesivir. Um, monoclonals, right? If they're anybody, um, is still negative,
the data we talked about from, uh, the Regeneron cocktail. June 24th, the FDA announced that they
had issued an emergency use authorization and EUA for the drug tosyllism app, uh, for the
treatment of hospitalized adults and patients, um, who are receiving steroids, um, require
supplemental oxygen, um, but then progress. Um, this data supported the data supporting this, uh,
EUA, uh, was based on four clinical trials. Um, and we've talked about, I think most of these,
they included one randomized controlled open label platform trial, uh, that was recovery,
three randomized double blind placebo controlled trials, impacta, covecta, and remdacta.
While all the four clinical trials contributed, um, the most important as far as numbers,
potential benefit came from the recovery and the impacta trial. So just to remind people, um,
of those trials, um, but to put this in, in context, person ends up in the hospital.
You've started remdesivir. You're supporting them with oxygen. You've started steroids.
Their oxygen requirement increases. That's where you think about tosyllism app.
The recovery trial was the trial that looked at over 4,000 hospitalized patients, uh,
with severe, um, COVID-19. Um, and this study demonstrated a statistically significant reduction
in risk of death and time in the hospital. Um, the impacta trial, a smaller trial, 389 hospitalized
patients, um, also demonstrated, um, benefit, uh, a decreased risk for ending up on a ventilator
and also a decreased risk of death. Um, but to reinforce timing really matters,
the benefit is only seen in those patients with an elevated inflammatory markers that
progressed to higher oxygen requirements despite steroids. Um, and there's a time window. You
want to give this, um, less than 48 hours after they escalate. If they escalate, they're on a
ventilator. You wait till day three. Um, you may just be, um, increasing their, their risk of
opportunistic infections. All right. This has been long enough, but let's finish with long COVID.
Um, there's really a nice perspective in the New England Journal of Medicine. Um, and it was
entitled confronting our next national health disaster, long haul COVID. Um, and the authors
suggest that factoring in new infections in unvaccinated people, we can conservatively expect
more than 15 million cases of long COVID resulting from this pandemic. Um, even though the data is
still emerging, um, the average age of patients with long COVID is about 40, um, which means that
the majority of these individuals are in their prime working years. Um, and they, they discuss
that giving these demographics long COVID is likely to cast a long shadow on our healthcare system
and the economic recovery that everyone is talking about. Um, and this is certainly
something we're continuing to see. Um, I'll conclude there before we hit emails. Um, but again,
to remind everyone, um, we are continuing to support foundation international medical relief
of children. Um, so drop what you're doing, pull over to the side of the road, go to parasites
without borders.com, um, and donate so that we can continue to help them and continue to provide
this, um, weekly COVID clinical update. Daniel, I just want to point out that transmission trial
in the UK or the, the observational study was only, most of the people were only after one dose,
so it could be better after two. That, that is, that is encouraging. All right, time for some
email. You can send yours to Daniel at microb.tv. Mark writes, I wanted to bring your attention
that there are an estimated 9 million Americans living abroad for work of retirement where
they're temporary trap. I'm based in Southeast Asia for work. I can return, but for many Americans,
it's too expensive or dangerous. The US State Department has failed to respond to this group,
something that would be easy to address via the embassies and consulates. I've written to Dr.
Francis Collins requesting this issue be raised. My question is if we can ship millions of vaccines
to India, why can't we also take care of at risk Americans currently residing outside the US? I've
written to the New York Times and Washington Post with no response. I would appreciate you raising
the issue on Twiv and forwarding my message to those persons you believe could be helpful in moving
this forward. And I mean, you're, you're making really good points here. Um, we do know, right,
that the State Department has shipped vaccines to those embassies to vaccinate their staff.
My brother-in-law is actually in the State Department stationed in Ukraine with his family. So Tim
Juliet and their three kids. And actually, people may know my other connection to the State Department.
My wife's father was a US ambassador. He was Career State Department. And yeah, this is a tough
situation. The they are, they have sent limited amounts of vaccines to vaccinate State Department
personnel. But they really haven't, you know, expanded that out to the millions of expats that
you describe. And I'm not sure what the political thinking is, is behind that. I mean, these are,
these are American citizens. We're supposed to be looking out for them. And right now in the middle
of a pandemic, looking out for someone is getting them access to a vaccine. So yeah, well, I guess
our listeners can all hear, hear this letter read on the air and hopefully something will happen.
Joy writes, there's an active clinical trial for use of monoclonals.
The Laronlem app for treating long haulers. I signed up for it in last January, but got
reinfected again before the trial began. I think there are a couple of other trials being conducted
since there are no treatment options for long COVID, M-I-S-C-P-A-S-E. I'm wondering,
why are they not testing Regeneron, etc. for that purpose? Us long haulers know who we are.
Sadly, many of us are being gaslit by the medical community. My doc has known me for most of my
life and didn't recognize this as a condition until recently. After more than a year, I'm deeply
sad and this isn't getting enough attention. After 18 months, still no medical code. My doctor
doesn't even know how to refer me to a specialist for it. My insurance will cover the long-term
effects were being denied care because our doctors are unable to code for it. I was unable to get
monoclonals after my most recent infection because my doctor didn't know how to prescribe the infusion
regarding PASK. Hope you can give us long haulers some hope and insight because the public health
and medicine system is moving too slow. Joy? Yeah. Joy, it is moving too slow. I'm going to
echo that. I mentioned last time, and maybe you can write this down and tell your physician,
but we were encouraged to currently use the code B94.8 to identify these individual, and that is for
sequelae of other specified infections and parasitic diseases. We are hoping in October, and I think
this is always shocking to me. We're hoping in October we'll be using U09.9, but what are we
supposed to do in the meantime? It reminded me of one of the discussions at one of the hospitals
where they felt like one medicine was not really effective, and they said, we're going to stop
using it on Friday. And I'm like, I'm going to stop using it today. So why don't we have a code
and start using it today, crazy as that seems. What I will say, and this is encouraging,
is there's a lot of money, and there's a lot of interest in trying to find treatments for
you, for the people suffering with long COVID. A big thing is we want to do it right. What did
we learn over the last 18 months? We can spend a lot of money and do a lot of trials and find
out nothing. It's very easy to do a bad trial. So that was actually what was triggering my
conversation with Melissa Stockwell, is there's a lot of centers that are now in stage one phase,
and it's going to then move into stage two. And there will be centers all around the country,
PASC, so post-acute squelly of COVID centers, where patients will go for treatment. They will
also go for the opportunity to participate in research, because we do not have a lot to offer.
I think I mentioned in the past, there was this suggestion that we would send people to these
centers of excellence. Well, it's not a center of excellence until we can provide excellence.
And we're not there yet. We don't have a lot of answers. The research, the clinical trials that
are all being set up are going to give us those answers, and then we will have centers of excellence.
So I want to say I'm very optimistic, but yeah, it is moving too slowly. And if you have long
COVID, it's moving much too slowly. Tom writes, our son will turn 12 early July plans to get
vaccinated on his birthday during your show last week. You mentioned the study on college athletes
responded to a parent email about myocarditis, pointing out that the long-term risk from natural
infection is much greater than from vaccination. We're also hearing some doctors saying that the
first dose might be okay, but too for a child, too much, too risky. How much does the first dose of
vaccine decrease the infection risk compared to the second dose? How much does the myocarditis risk
from the vaccine increase between first and second dose? Are you recommending one dose or two for a
12-year-old male? Yeah, so we are. I am recommending two doses of the mRNA vaccine for a 12-year-old.
And the reason we say that is all the evidence has suggested that this is a true prime boost
vaccination series. So that initial vaccination gets us a little bit of T cell, a low level of
antibodies. We've seen some of the data out of the UK, particularly against the delta variant,
not a lot of protection. You get that second dose, and you really get a boost. The antibodies
really go up, and the real-world data suggests that then you are protected. So we see the myocarditis
after that second dose. We now see that there is a certain connection here. It's been sort of,
I guess, pinned down, and we have a sense of what the rate is, what to expect. But if you want that
protection against COVID-19, maybe for a lifetime in an adolescent, I encourage two shots.
And Lori writes, Lori's a Canadian working in Kazakhstan. They received two doses of Sputnik,
but now when they come back to Canada, they're not recognized. The vaccine is not recognized by
Health Canada, so they have to be revaccinated. And so the question is, we had two doses of Sputnik
in May is two doses of another vaccine in July, bad for the body. I wouldn't say bad for the body.
You may experience some reactogenicity. I would expect that. We're seeing lots of people in the
situation you're in in Canada and the United States, other places that have the same policy.
You're going to get a little bit of extra protection, maybe. But I think it's fine to go ahead. I think
it's safe and will be effective. That's COVID-19 clinical update number 69 with Dr. Daniel Griffin.
Thank you, Daniel. Thank you, Vincent. Thank you, everyone, and be safe.
