This week in virology, the podcast about viruses, the kind that make you sick.
From Microbe TV, this is Twiv. This week in virology, Episode 778, recorded on July 8, 2021.
I'm Vincent Raccoon, hello. And you're listening to the podcast all about viruses. Joining me today
from New York, Daniel Griffin. Hello, everyone. So I understand that we have a slight uptick in
cases in the U.S. due to a few states where there are a lot of unvaccinated people.
Vincent, Vincent, have you left the echo chamber? It's the Delta variants, of course.
Oh, I forgot. Nothing says nothing to do with a lack of vaccination, a lack of masking,
nothing to do with human behavior. It's all the virus. We're all doing the right things.
Got it. Got it. No, I have to say, I think I went through stages of frustration and I've
sort of come out the other side earlier today. I was listening. It's actually Carl Zimmer,
right? Talking about how he's welcoming people into the Delta Club. He knew this was coming.
It would be the end of the world. And Vincent, when you say it's exactly true, you look at a map
and where people did not get vaccinated, they're getting COVID. But the hospitalizations and deaths
are not going up, right? I don't understand. No. That is something that I was doing to talk
yesterday, actually talking about what is the story with the Delta variant? What is this concept
of transmissibility? And actually, I will tell everyone a little shame that I didn't get with
777, but I did really enjoy to have 777. And I think it's important because sloppy language,
I think puts us all at risk because there's this concept, right? I did sort of a thought
experiment in this talk I did yesterday. I said, what does transmission mean to you?
And then I had asked some people before the show. And one of them was like, well, I heard
it's so transmissible that two people were walking in the street and one person walked
by the other and got COVID. I'm like, let's be honest, they were having an affair. I mean,
so, you know, and I think then people start, oh, the masks don't even work. Why do I bother?
The vaccines don't work. Why do I bother? And the reality is, is that, yeah, there is a fitness
advantage to the Delta variant. That's fine. We keep seeing different variants. And, you know,
no one ever sort of raised the specter with flus in past years. So I'm not sure why science is be
damned during times of COVID, but I'm sure we'll get into that. But no, I mean, the vaccines,
as we'll talk about continue to be very effective. Areas with excellent vaccination coverage have
low rates, areas like Nevada, Missouri, other areas where they're not getting vaccinated,
lots of COVID. But we're not seeing, you know, suddenly, if you look at the numbers across the
country, we're not seeing suddenly that the hospitals are getting full again. It's all regional,
it all corresponds to poor vaccine uptake. Our quotation will hit right onto this.
It may be said that natural selection is daily and hourly scrutinizing throughout the world.
Every variation, even the slightest rejecting that which is bad, preserving and adding up all
that is good, silently and insensibly working. And that's right out of on the origin of species
by Charles Darwin. And I would say it's good. You want to quote Charles Darwin right out of his
writing because there are so many misquotes, Darwin out there. Some of them even etched in
marble that were never said by Charles Darwin. But now I know that when we do science communication,
people think that the intelligence level of the genuine population is about fifth grade level or
such. But I don't think that's true, particularly the Twiv audience. I think people can understand
survival of the fittest and the concepts that the viruses are competing against
themselves. And we are just behaving poorly. But okay, children, COVID and mental health,
as I like to say, children are at low risk, but they are not at no risk.
A really nice discussion. I think people are realizing COVID is becoming endemic. So really,
the selection of parent and adolescent is making is what is the risk of vaccination versus what is
the risk of eventually getting COVID. And really nice conversations having yesterday with a colleague
of mine, Michael Amala, just about there may be an increased incidence of cardiac inflammation
after vaccination. This in no way compares to the incredibly high incidence and severity that we see
when these kids actually get COVID. All right, so let's move to transmission, pre-exposure period
transmission. Still never miss an opportunity to test. We're falling down quite a bit on this.
But one of the things I get a lot of questions about, and we had a nice MMWR early release about
this, is what about these air purifiers? And the early release entitled efficacy of portable air
cleaners and masking for reducing indoor exposure to simulated exhaled SARS-CoV-2 aerosols,
United States 2021. Now, I have to say, this sounds like it was a fun project. So let me go
through what the authors did. The authors reported using a breathing aerosol source simulator to
mimic a meeting participant, exhaling infectious particles. That was the source. And then there
were three breathing simulators used to mimic a speaker, two participants exposed to these aerosol
particles. And interestingly enough, these simulators were actually head forms with
elastomeric skin from Hanson Robotics used to use to do these experiments. They set them up,
set to either 15 liters per minute or 28 liters per minute. And then they use these optical particle
counters to collect aerosol particles. There's a figure in the paper, but I have to say,
I wanted to see the video. I'm going to have to admit, this must have been cool. And they did
report that based upon this investigation, using two HEPA air cleaners close to the aerosol source,
reduced the aerosol exposure of the uninfected participants and speaker by up to 65% and a
combination of the HEPA air filters and universal masking reduced exposures by up to 90%.
But there's a few comments. I mean, this is a big topic, but a few comments. First,
just this was really a simulated basically air cleaning procedure. There's no SARS-CoV-2
in this paper. This paper actually doesn't really tell us anything about the actual
transmission of SARS-CoV-2. It just tells us about how you might keep droplet particles aerosols
out of the air. So I think that's important. When people ask me about the HEPA air cleaners,
I say sounds great. There's no magic barrier at six feet. So you get in that suburban home
with poor airflow, you get in that office, you start getting a lot of people in there. And I think
that it's reasonable to consider these air purifiers, reasonable to open those windows.
Your wrist does not go to zero when you hit six feet. So this is interesting, but
realize I've seen a lot of retweets of this, look, we've been saying this forever. I'm not sure
what you've been saying forever. This just tells you that air filters do filter the air.
All right. Active vaccination. Never miss an opportunity to vaccinate. And vaccination is how
this pandemic ends. And we are seeing that across the country. So last week, I talked about the
preprint serum neutralizing antibody of mRNA 1273 against SARS-CoV-2 variants. That's the Moderna
vaccine. And this suggested that the Moderna mRNA vaccine produced antibody levels with neutralized
activity against several SARS-CoV-2 variants, including the Delta variant. I also mentioned
the data from the UK suggesting the Pfizer BioNTech vaccine 88% effective against symptomatic
disease from from the Delta variant, then the AstraZeneca about 60%. This week, we had some
data on the J&J vaccine in the form of the preprint, add 26, COVID-2, S elicited neutralizing
activity against Delta and other SARS-CoV-2 variants of concern. So similar to the Moderna
preprint, the authors tested Sierra from recipients who'd gotten a single dose of the J&J. This is
the J&J vaccine. They tested the Sierra for neutralizing activity against several SARS-CoV-2
variants. All tested variants demonstrated susceptibility to the induced serum neutralization,
albeit there was reduction compared to the B1 strain. Most pronounced reduction was observed
for the beta. That was about 3.6. The gamma, that was 3.4. Now, there was only a 1.6-fold reduction
observed for the widely spreading Delta variant. A couple comments here. This work was done using
pseudotyped virus. And again, this is looking at antibodies, right? This is not looking at T cells.
This is also not giving us real world experience as far as the ability of the J&J vaccine to
reduce our chance of getting sick, to reduce our chance of getting infected. But I do know,
I get lots of questions. We got all these people wanting to top off their immunity after J&J
with an mRNA vaccine. This does not support that. That is not currently recommended. If anything,
this would give people, I think, maybe a little bit of confidence that even just looking at the
antibody levels, and we really think that J&J's power is in a T cell response, that we're maybe
better off from a J&J standpoint with a circulating Delta relative to the gamma or the beta.
Now, last week, I also discussed effect of vaccination on household transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in England.
And that was where they reported that vaccination was associated without a 40 to 50% reduction in
transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in household context. But as Vincent brought up, most of the vaccinated
index patients in this data set, 93% had only gotten the first dose of vaccine. I know when I
discuss my wife with this with my wife, her comment was, well, that's useless. Well, remember,
this was the UK. There had been a significant period of time where people had only gotten one dose.
So we're hoping that after a second dose that that reduction is even more. So I just want to
point that out. But we did get a little more information in this realm. The New England Journal
of Medicine had a paper, prevention and attenuation of COVID-19 with BNT 162B2 and mRNA 1273 vaccines.
So this is the Pfizer BioNTech and the Moderna vaccine. And I think this paper is also helping
to build the story that people who get vaccinated not only are protected themselves, but there may
be an impact on interrupting transmission. So these were a number of participants. They
excluded participants with laboratory documentation of SARS-CoV-2 infection prior to the start of
the study. And then they went ahead and conducted a prospective cohort study on 3975 health care
personnel, first responders and other essential and frontline workers. And they looked from December
14, 2020 to April 10, 2021. And I mean, I have to say, this is great. The participants completed
weekly SARS-CoV-2 testing, mid-terminate nasal swabs for qualitative and quantitative PCR testing.
Now 796 or 20% of these individuals were completely unvaccinated. About 636 had received
at least one dose. 2543 had gotten two doses. And they report that they detected SARS-CoV-2
infection in five of those that were fully vaccinated, 11 partially vaccinated, 156 unvaccinated.
And I remember different denominators down. So I break this down into what percent are we looking
at. About 0.2% of the fully vaccinated, 1.7% of the partially vaccinated, 20% of the unvaccinated
got infected. So you're about 100 times less likely to get infected, about a two-log reduction
in even testing positive after the vaccination. They then went one step further to look at the
level of the viral mRNA, right? Not actually looking at live or infectious or active virus,
but looking at viral mRNA. And they also looked at the duration at which you can detect this.
In the vaccinated, their data showed lower levels of viral RNA and a lower percentage of individuals
still had detectable viral RNA for greater than one week. So I think this is compelling, right?
This is data showing that people who are vaccinated are less likely to get infected.
I always point out that if you can't get infected, you can't spread it to others. Also
suggesting, as we've seen, that if you do get infected after vaccination, it looks like there's
less viral RNA. Also looks like that is present detectable for a shorter period of time.
Now, one of the big things that keeps coming up, right, is what is your sort of altruistic,
your civic virtue to getting vaccinated. And so I'm going to share a story because I think if
people think these things through, let me say, yeah, I guess I should get vaccinated. And this was a
call I got on Thursday evening. And the story was it was a three-year-old. I got the call from the
grandparents who are physicians. This three-year-old, most of the pandemic isolated in the home,
now has the opportunity to go off to a daycap. And the mom's excited. She's pregnant, has another
child under the age of 10 as well. And on Thursday morning, everyone's ready for the
July 4th exciting weekend. There could be the two sisters, the grandparents, the two grandchildren.
The three-year-old starts to feel not well. Sort of runny nose, and they get a call that morning
from the camp. I'm sorry, but the camp counselor that has been taking care of your three-year-old
just called us to let us know that they have COVID. Unvaccinated camp counselor, the three-year-old
gets tested, and the three-year-old has COVID. So let's look at the impact of that counselor's
decision to not get vaccinated and work around children. So that counselor transmitted the virus
to the three-year-old. We now have a pregnant woman at home with a six-year-old. We have a
three-year-old who's got COVID, who now can't go back to camp. Finally, had had some social
interaction. The six-year-old is in quarantine. So the six-year-old can't go to camp.
The pregnant woman's sister had come out for the four-day weekend to all be together.
She leaves immediately. The two grandparents leave. What a disaster. So just think about the fact,
our decisions affect our community. They affect others. If you're going to work around young,
unvaccinated vulnerable children or other vulnerable populations, your decisions don't just affect
you. They affect others. And I think this is just sort of a story about how that person's decision
really had a significant impact. So let's think about that when we make our decisions.
All right. The period of detectable viral replication, the viral symptom phase,
the time for monitoring and monoclonals. I like to say where you get your test is
ideally where you should get your monoclonals. And I have to say, anticipate in the next couple
months. I'm very optimistic we're going to have some exciting small molecule inhibitor results.
Sort of an option going into the fall and winter when we will still have COVID-19.
But some less exciting data on ivermectin with the publication of the paper.
ivermectin to prevent hospitalization in patients with COVID-19. ivercorre COVID-19,
a randomized double blind placebo control trial in BMC infectious diseases. So a lot of people
were waiting for this. This was nicknamed the Corientis trial. This was a randomized double
blind placebo controlled study conducted in non hospitalized individuals with COVID-19
in Corientes, Argentina. So patients with SARS-CoV-2, positive nasal swabs were contacted within 48
hours of that positive test by telephone to invite them to participate. The trial then
randomized 501 patients between August 19, 2020 and February 22, 2021. The patients were
randomized to receive ivermectin. It was a weight-based dosing with an N of 250, the placebo N of
251. This treatment was for two days with this weight-based. The efficacy of ivermectin to prevent
hospitalizations was evaluated as the primary outcome. The mean age was 42 years and the mean
time since symptom onset to inclusion was four days, right? So this was actually quite early.
The primary outcome of hospitalization was met in 5.6 percent of the individuals in the ivermectin
group, 8.4 percent in the placebo group. The p value on this difference was 0.227. Time to
hospitalization was not statistically different between the groups. The mean time from study
enrollment to invasive mechanic, ventilatory support was 5.25 days in the ivermectin, 10 days
in the placebo group. That actually, interesting enough, was statistically significant. People in
the ivermectin group, on average, ended up on a mechanical ventilation in about five days versus
10 days in placebo. That's a p value of 0.019. I know there's a lot of people who are really
passionate about ivermectin. There's this buzz that's a crime against humanity that not everyone
is getting ivermectin. But I have to say, so far, we are not seeing the science to support that
degree of excitement. At this point, still, we're not recommending use of ivermectin outside of
clinical trials. If anything, I think this also gives us a boundary of how potentially effective
ivermectin could possibly be if we have a larger powered study. So, put that in context. I'm sure
I will get some fairly friendly constructive comments. All right, the early inflammatory phase.
The publication, association between administration of IL-6 antagonist and mortality among patients
hospitalized for COVID-19, a meta-analysis. And this is out of React, right? So, that is the WHO,
rapid evidence appraisal for COVID-19 therapies, the React working group. And there's a couple of
these, right? I think I've shared that I sit on the American Society of Hematology working group
working group, looking at anticoagulation, a number of individuals sit on this WHO group.
And what they're doing is they're looking at data that we have. Actually, there's a lot of
communication even ahead of time with the researchers prior to things being published.
This paper was published in JAMA and just reinforces the role in select patients of IL-6
antagonist therapy, right? So, this is tosy, tosyllismat that we've talked about.
This was a prospective meta-analysis of 27 randomized trials, including 10,930 patients of whom
2,565 died by 28 days. The 28-day all-course mortality was lower among patients who received
the IL-6 antagonists compared with those who received usual care or placebo. But I want to break
down because I think this is really critical and I want our listeners to catch this. The summary
odds ratio for the Association of IL-6 antagonist treatment with 28-day all-course mortality
was 0.78, so a 22% reduction with concomitant administration of corticosteroids. It was 1.09,
so about a 9% increase in mortality if the patients did not get corticosteroids.
So, I think this really enforces this paradigm now in a lot of our treatment guidelines.
Patient comes to the hospital. Their oxygen saturation is less than 94%. We start them on
steroids. They progress to a higher level of oxygen requirement. Then we look at adding the IL-6
antagonist tosyllismab. If you do not give them steroids, do not give them tosyllismab. This is
not a treatment for everyone. It's a select group. If they escalate to that higher level of oxygen,
you have a window of only about 48 hours to jump on board. If you wait to day three,
we actually see that we make things worse. This should be done with someone who knows these
fine details. The tail phase long COVID. This, I have to say, was the excitement of my week. I
really enjoyed seeing this Lancet preprint, the impact of COVID-19 vaccination on symptoms of
long COVID, an international survey of people with lived experience of long COVID. Now, the authors
invited patients with long COVID to complete a web-based questionnaire. 900 people were invited
to participate, and several were excluded for different reasons. So, ultimately, we end up
analyzing 812 individuals. Following vaccination, 57.9% of participants reported improvement in
symptoms. 17.9% reported that they felt worse. 22.2% said they were really just about the same.
And there was considerable individual variation in these responses.
A larger improvement in symptom severity were seen in those who received the mRNA vaccines
compared to the adenoviral vector vaccines. So, this is the UK. So, sort of think about that,
a few comments. Since this was the UK, only 130 of these individuals had received a second dose of
vaccine. So, here, we're actually seeing a 57.9% of participants reporting improvement after just
a single dose of vaccine. And I think I've shared that a lot of us have had the experience that we
pick up more responders with a second dose. This was an online survey, right? So, it recruited
participants via social media and is not really representative of the entire population of people
with long COVID. Most of the respondents identified as white. And by most, I mean over 90%.
Over 80% were female. There was no control group here. I will say that there was a great
figure two. And I want people to hopefully be linked to on the Parasites Without Borders website,
right? And you can go to this right after you donate. But there's a great figure two. And figure
two is nice to look at, well, what is getting better? Because people always ask me that. Is there
a profile of who gets better? We saw individuals with fatigue, reporting improved fatigue,
brain fog improved, my algaes improved, shortness of breath improved, insomnia improved,
chest pain, a lot of these individuals says ongoing chest pain, that improved or resolved,
gastrointestinal symptoms, maybe underappreciated earlier in the pandemic. A lot of these individuals
have ongoing reflux, diarrhea, discomfort that improves. The inability to smell interesting
after seeing improvement after vaccination, the autonomic dysfunction, the pot that we've all
heard about, even these individuals that have chronic cough, fever, rash or other vascular issues.
So the authors comment a little bit about the fact that there was no control group. They do
point out that the majority of patients had been experienced as symptoms for at least nine months
when they enrolled them. And there was a return to baseline for at least half of the patients
within one month of vaccination. So there's a nice sort of timing here suggesting that
for the majority of long COVID patients receiving a vaccination not only offers protection against
reinfection, but also may potentially improve their symptoms. So all right, I will finish there
today. And just remind everyone throughout the months of May, June and July, we're in July already.
I was shocked that we've already gotten there. We are going to continue to take your donations.
We're going to match them. We're going to continue to help Foundation International Medical Relief
of Children. And I think one thing that is maybe clear to everyone, as good as things are getting
in parts of the United States, you look at areas like Sub-Saharan Africa, only about one or two
percent of those individuals even have access to vaccines. Here are all these discussions in the
US. Should I get a third dose? Should I top off my J&J? Just remember, so many parts of the world,
they don't even have access to that first dose. And we want to work with these groups and try to
help support them so they can get back in these areas, help with the vaccine rollout. And you can
be part of that. So thank you. Time for some email questions for Daniel. You can send yours to
Daniel at microbe.tv. Carrie from Southern California has arranged monoclonal antibody treatment for
over 40 patients in the last two months. But there are still high risk patients who are eligible.
However, resources in his area have been reprioritized. And the monoclonal infusing clinic is being
closed with referral of high risk patients to community sites. But the problem is we haven't found
any. The HHS and Regeneron websites have extensive lists of Regeneron-Covian fusion sites. But every
one of them in our area have ceased operation. County and state funding appears to be drying up.
There don't seem to be any alternatives for patients in our community. If you found a similar
problem in your area, are there any national efforts to allow continued treatment with monoclonals?
I'm interested in your thoughts. Thanks for all you do. Yeah, I mean, that's disturbing,
disheartening, I have to say. I was actually just on the phone earlier today with Adam Fitterstein.
He's the head of our pro-health urgent care. He's just talking, are they having any issues?
So I always try to keep this on my radar. We're very fortunate. We continue to be very fortunate
in the New York Tri-State area. Our partners, the Catholic hospitals, you can send an individual
right over. A few hours later, they're on their way home having already received their monoclonals.
The large healthcare system northwell is jumping in with their tents as well. We really have good
access here locally. But what you're saying is actually, I've heard that this is starting to
be a problem nationally. There's no profit here, right? We live in a capitalist society.
The number of COVID cases are dropping down. A lot of people are returning to business as usual.
There isn't this huge demand for monoclonals in many parts of the country. There certainly
should be in some others. Yeah, this is a problem. I remember in my previous incarnation, I spent
some time in Washington actually training lobbyists. I can believe that. And one of the things is,
you've got to create in a capitalist society a model that really makes people encouraged to
do this. I hate to say that, right? We should all just do this because it's the right thing.
But these medicines, the Regeneron products are bought by the government. Maybe you can charge
into infusion, but there really isn't a big market driver to get this done. So they continue to be
one of our most effective, if not our only most effective during that first week. We're lucky in
the New York state area. But yeah, this is a problem. And hopefully the word people are listening,
and we can get this addressed. So Darcy writes about an experience with his first asterism
zenika jab. He has had a prior history of anaphylaxis to contrast agents used during an MRI scan.
Initially, he was okay, but had an arrhythmia bad enough to need the emergency room,
and had had several synths taking me there since each time discharged with no insights.
While I had a history of palpitations and some arrhythmia is nothing significant for years,
could be entirely coincidental that it happened within five days of my first jab.
I'm awaiting a variety of tests to see what might be going on. But in the meantime,
I kept getting contacted about my second and now overdue AstraZeneca jab. The doc told me not to
get the second one until I had some cardio investigations, but with the Delta variant and
pressure from social and familiar sources to be fully vaccinated. I wonder if you can comment on
your experiences regarding arrhythmias and COVID vaccination, whether a second jab could
exacerbate arrhythmia symptoms. There's several things here, and this is a great,
great email, great question. What we are doing in the US, if someone had an issue with one
vaccination, and here it will be, let's say it was Pfizer, Moderna, those are two dose,
we might look at switching over to a different vaccine, and it is. It's the mRNA vaccines that
really have this connection. We're saying it's about one in 100, one in 200,000
risk of a myocarditis. I don't know if that's what's causing the arrhythmia. I'm not even sure
it's causal, certainly here. But a lot of this is going to depend where you are in the world.
If you had an issue with that first AstraZeneca vaccine, do you have the ability to switch to
a different vaccine to complete this? Can you go ahead and then do a Pfizer 2 dose, which would
be actually how we would approach that. We would just give, at this point, heterogenous or mix and
match. That's going to sort of depend where you are. If you do not have a choice, then this is
going to become that risk benefit of, are you going to risk getting COVID, or are you going to risk
potentially having arrhythmia cardiac issues after that? That's a tough call, and I see why
they're saying you should go see a physician, you should see a cardiologist. They can get to the
root of this. Hopefully, they can even get a sense of whether or not it makes logical sense
them. This is related. I mean, the five days after, there's that sort of causal suggestion.
And I have to say, this could be the last sort of is the Delta variant. What is the only good thing
about the Delta variant is we actually are seeing an uptick in people coming and saying, you know,
I wasn't going to get vaccinated. But now with everything I'm reading about the Delta variant
in the media echo chamber, I'm not a huge fan of the end justifies the means. I think we need to
be honest. But I'm always happy to hear people coming in and getting vaccinated.
My, my view, Daniel, is that at least people stopped using the word strain. They're using
variant that. Okay, we'll take what we can, Vince. All right, Ken writes, I've just watched a
presentation where several medical doctors have hypothesized based on clinical studies
that long haul COVID is caused by the presence of nonclassical monocytes containing S1 protein
fragments located on a Neil epithelial cells of blood vessels. These cells apparently engender
various inflammatory conditions in the vascular system, presenting as common symptoms of long
COVID. The doctors have also presented evidence from their own practice that the use of statins
and Ivermectin have benefited patients by presumably shutting down over active monocytes or somehow
blocking the effect of residual S1. I'm not a doctor or scientist, but I would love to hear
your thoughts on this hypothesis. Yeah, so I'm going to comment. I hope those physicians didn't
use the word evidence when they were describing their anecdotes, their clinical anecdotes.
You know, the way science is supposed to work, and I really am a little troubled by what happened
during the COVID-19 pandemic is you may make some observations in the clinic. And that's really
what drives you to say we need to study this. We need to find out if it's true. It is very easy
to be tricked by our observations, by our selective memory of things. And so normally you would have
a theory. You might do some basic science to get a sense of whether or not that's true. If that
seems consistent, then you would look at a small trial to get a sense. Then you would talk to your
statisticians about how many people do we need to have in this trial? Because you don't willy
nilly start giving medicines to lots of people. Unfortunately, the last 18 months has been sort
of the Wild West. I'm hoping we're getting away from influencers, thought leaders, spreading
Atlantic Dodes. I think we got to get back to science. And what is science? Science is really
just asking in a way that you can find out the truth. What works? What does it work? And then
the risk benefit of making different choices and different recommendations for our patients.
What is it that Mark Chris lip says, the three most dangerous word that a doctor says?
In my experience. There you go. And I like to say the plural of anecdote is not data.
That's a good one. That's a good one too. Ken, by the way, said he had long whole COVID in November
and then it got better after his first dose of Moderna. That's fantastic. No, I mean, we are
seeing that. I know Akiko up at Yale is working on studying this but having issues recruiting enough
patients. So we are seeing this. It's nice that we had this UK investigation. Just more support,
right? And again, this is an issue. We have observations in the clinic. We have to do these
informal ways to really turn those anecdotes into information. All right, one more from Danielle.
I think we covered this but Danielle got her first J&J in April and then decided to get a dose of
Pfizer and listened to your podcast last week about a person who got two more doses of a vaccine
even after Sputnik. And she wants to know is whether it's safe to go ahead, get the second
Pfizer dose or whether I would be subjecting my immune system to too much immune stimulation.
Yeah, I think there's two topics here to touch on. We'll start with the safety issue, right?
You know, the US as far as recognizing someone is fully vaccinated, there's the list of not only
EUA, so US FDA, EUA approved, but also now WHO approved vaccines and you look at that list.
And if you completed the series, you can be considered, recognized, all the rights and
privileges of being fully vaccinated. But we're certainly, we certainly have seen a lot of
individuals that didn't meet that criteria and ended up getting a couple more doses of a US FDA
EUA approved vaccine, even though they already had received some other unrecognized unapproved
vaccine outside the country. So from a safety point of view, not been formally studied,
we do now have experience with thousands of individuals who have gone through this. We're
not seeing any reports in VAERS or anything else. So from a safety standpoint, I'm not concerned,
but I am concerned about the logic here, right? The JJ is a very effective vaccine for doing what
we want it to do. I'm not sure you really need to be topping things off with an mRNA series.
That's COVID-19 clinical update number 70 with Dr. Daniel Griffin. Thank you, Daniel.
Oh, thank you, Vincent. Thank you, everybody, and be safe.
