This week in virology, the podcast about viruses, the kind that make you sick.
From Microbe TV, this is Twiv, this week in virology, episode 780, recorded on July 15th, 2021.
I'm Vincent Draconiello, and you're listening to the podcast all about viruses. Joining me today
from New York, Daniel Griffin. Hello, everyone. Daniel, this is update number 71. What's going on
here in New York City? You know, there's a lot of stuff going on and not great stuff going on,
so I'm going to jump right in with my quotation and then I'm going to give the update because
things are headed in the wrong direction. Maybe we'll talk a little bit about why.
So, in questions of science, the authority of a thousand is not worth the humble reasoning
of a single individual. And that's Galileo, 1632. He was Italian. Wasn't he Italian Vincent?
He was. And I think revered in his time, right?
Well, by some, not by everyone. A lot of people thought he was heretical to propose that the
Earth was round and all of that stuff. Yeah, and the whole thing's not revolving around the Earth
to move away from an Earth-centric world to view. Yeah, he got death threats, for sure, right?
Yeah, so maybe some of our colleagues are having similar treatment today.
I think we're all locked in our towers, right? So, a lot of parallels here.
But the reason I bring that up is I know, Vincent, you really are a leader in this,
but I try to do this as well. I want to share what the science says and not just echo what so many
people are saying. If you say it 10 times, it does not make it any more true. So, what is going on?
We are seeing an uptick. And you can read the same article with just a different title.
What is this being driven by? It's being driven by the virus. It's being driven by behavior.
But we're also seeing some other new developments. I just want to give people a sense. The amount
of COVID we're seeing across the country is increasing. My buddy, Poe, out at the Everett Clinic in
Washington, went for quite a while, not seeing much. And we talked on Monday. He was now seeing
30, 40 a day. I was on the phone earlier today with a friend of mine, Adam Fitterstein,
who runs our urgent care centers in the New York area, under Bonnie Simmons as his boss.
And he was saying he went many days without seeing COVID. Now he's seeing 10 or 12 a day.
There's a little bit of a twist on this. I'm seeing some interesting
situations. I'm just going to share a couple stories. The first one was a colleague of mine,
a physician, fully vaccinated, maybe enjoying himself a little bit more than I do.
Maybe not taking me to any precautions. Ended up starting to feel not well,
tested positive for COVID. So had a mild outpatient experience with COVID,
but then actually brought it home to his spouse. And so then his spouse had COVID.
Also, his spouse was vaccinated. So another it was another mild case. So one vaccinated person
getting infected, spreading it to another vaccinated person. In this case, both were mild.
Another story was a dad. And this is actually a friend of mine, not a clinician. He does
something else for a living. And he started to feel crummy right about July 4th, right? July 4th is
sort of a target date here. Went and got tested. He was fully vaccinated. And to his surprise,
he tested positive for COVID. And then his son, who's below the age of 12, started to feel not
great and also tested positive for COVID. So it's interesting. We have a lot of ideas about early
on after vaccination, having really high antibody levels, maybe keeping people from getting infected,
keeping people from transmitting. But now we're starting to get six months out from those early
vaccinations. Are we starting to see this because of waning antibody levels? Are we starting to see
this because of changes in behavior, right? So I just want to share those stories just in case
people have a question. If you're vaccinated, can you get COVID? Yes. If you're vaccinated,
can you get COVID and spread it to other people? Well, there's just two real life examples
in addition to the science I've shared in the past. But the majority of infections are
presumably an unvaccinated people, right? It is completely true. And not only are the infections
predominantly in unvaccinated individuals, but looking around 99% of the admissions
are in unvaccinated individuals. So just to repeat that, vaccinations are huge at protecting
you from serious disease and hospitalizations. 99% of the people that end up in the hospital
that are dying from COVID over 99% are unvaccinated. So get vaccinated if I haven't mentioned that
before. I feel like I may have. Now, there's there's a lot of pressure I know to keep up each week
in terms of what's happening with COVID. I had like a nightmare the other night. I was, you know,
being asked a question and something new had come out in the last hour and I did not know about it.
So I woke up in a cold sweat. Yeah, it was not COVID. It was just, you know, I don't know what it is.
But my hope with these weekly clinical updates is to take some of the pressure off our busy
clinicians and listeners. And my commitment continues to be that if there's something really
critical that you need to know, I'm going to make sure that I bring it up in my clinical update.
And for a deeper dive, I want people to keep listening to Vincent and the crew on the other
Twiv episodes. It really is important. I think we went into this. Why do I need to know so much
about viruses? I think that most people have realized that you need to know a lot about viruses.
And the more we know, hopefully the longer period of time before we have something like this and
hopefully we'll do better the next time. All right. And I will try to keep this, you know,
at my 30 minutes. But this was an exciting last week. We got updated school and child care guidance
from the CDC. This is the much awaited K through 12 school guidance. And I'm going to go through
that part of this in some detail. And I will, don't worry as I go through this, I'm also going
to return to the hot button issues because I have realized as I've discussed this, there are some.
So number one, the CDC has come out. Students benefit from in-person learning and safely
returning to in-person instruction in the fall 2021 is a priority. And so I've been saying this
for a long time. A lot of us have been saying this. The CDC is really stepping up and saying
school is a priority. Number two, right here at the top of the list, vaccination is currently the
leading public health prevention strategy to end the COVID-19 pandemic. Remember, we're ending the
pandemic. We have realized we will never get rid of COVID-19. This is going to be part of our life.
But in the same comment, promoting vaccination can help schools safely return to in-person learning
as well as extracurricular activities and sports. Now, I know it's a little bit of a hot button
issue. People have said, you know, the schools need to open. It's number one priority. There
should be no qualifications. There should be no rules. Just make it happen. We'll get into this
a little bit more. There are ways to do this safely. And I'm going to go through the science
behind these recommendations. Next, and this is the hot button issue. Masks should be worn indoors
by all individuals, age two and older, who are not fully vaccinated. Consistent and correct
masks used by persons who are not fully vaccinated. People who are not fully vaccinated is especially
important indoors and in crowded settings when physical distancing cannot be maintained.
And I'm going to get back to that because not everyone is happy about masks. I don't know if
people have noticed. The CDC recommends schools maintain at least three feet of physical distance
between students within classrooms combined with indoor mask wearing by people who are
not fully vaccinated to reduce transmission risk. This is when it gets a little touchy for some
people when it is not possible to maintain a physical distance of at least three feet,
such as when schools cannot fully reopen while maintaining these distances. It is especially
important to layer multiple other prevention strategies, such as mentioned indoor masking.
So what they're saying here is if you can't get that three feet, if that's going to prevent you
from opening, do not prevent it from opening, you got to open, we're going to use a multi-layered
strategy. You got to get those schools open as the push from the CDC. Screening testing.
Don't forget testing, screening testing, ventilation, hand washing and respiratory etiquette, staying
home when sick and getting tested, contact tracing in combination with quarantine and isolation and
cleaning and disinfection are also important layers of prevention to keep schools safe.
So remember, these are layers. These are lots of things adding up to achieve that safe environment.
Students, teachers and staff should stay home when they have signs of any infectious illness
and be referred to their health care provider for testing and care. This should have seen to me
like an obvious thing for many years. COVID is bringing this out. You send sick people to a school.
What do we think is going to happen? Now, this many school served children under the age of 12
who are not eligible for vaccination at this time. Therefore, this guidance emphasizes
the implemented layered prevention strategies. COVID-19 prevention strategies remain critical
to protect people, including students, teachers, staff who are not fully vaccinated, especially
in areas of moderate to high community transmission levels. And finally, locality should monitor
community transmission, vaccination coverage, screening testing and occurrence of outbreaks
to guide decisions on the level of the layered prevention strategies. And this is all available
to go through even in more detail at the CDC site. But as I mentioned going through this,
there are a couple hot button issues. So let me talk a little bit about the science
behind this multilayered approach that includes masks, improved ventilation,
testing and vaccination in children. And the CDC, in addition to this guidance, they actually
have a science brief. And this is science brief transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in K through 12 schools
and early care and education programs. And this was updated July 9th. So this is the CDC's attempt
to communicate the science that is driving these recommendations. And I do encourage people to
look at this information. I was having a discussion just yesterday with friend of mine, Dr. Lucy McBride,
you know, and she was asking like, well, what is the science behind these recommendations?
So let me go through. What is the science? I mean, the CDC is a science driven organization.
They're not going with hunches. And these are the four points that they base this on. One,
children and adolescents can be infected with SARS-CoV-2, can get sick with COVID-19,
and can spread the virus to others. So those are true. That's not something we can just deny.
Two, several studies conducted during the COVID-19 pandemic suggested that the incidence rate among
children and adolescents was lower than among adults. So remember, low, but not no risk. However,
the lower incidence rates may have been due in part two children when compared to adults,
having fewer opportunities for exposure. And I do really want to point this out. People say,
oh, only about 500 children died in the last year. When we had them locked away,
not able to go to school, not able to engage in all these activities, what happens when you
start having children with the same exposure opportunities, it's an odd wording, exposure
opportunities that adults have had. Point number three, although rates of severe outcomes,
for instance, hospitalization and mortality from COVID-19 among children and adolescents are low,
youth who belong to some racial and ethnic minority groups are disproportionately affected,
similar to adults, and COVID-19 deaths among persons aged 5 to 17 years, 120 deaths among,
let me say that again, 71 COVID-19 deaths among persons aged 5 to 17. We saw 120 deaths among
those aged 0 to 4. Those were all reported to the National Center for Health Statistics through
July 7. So just to point out, that was reducing these exposures to the children. We still were
seeing deaths. The CDC doesn't go into this, but I will point out there's also the issue of long
COVID. We've now we've focused too narrowly in adults, but also in children on just deaths and
hospitalization. Think about all the children we've talked about with cardiac manifestations,
with long COVID, who months after COVID are still not back normal. All right, number four, studies
of SARS-CoV-2 transmission in schools that consistently implemented layered prevention strategies
have shown success in limiting transmission in schools. And I'm going to go through a little bit
of the science here. And I do want to point out there is lots of science behind these recommendations.
These recommendations are based on about 100 peer-reviewed publications that one can access
and read on the CDC site. So we've talked about some of these studies before. One was the study
that we talked about in the end of May. It was a study of 11 school districts in North Carolina
with in-person learning for at least nine weeks during the fall 2020 semester. And they reported
minimal school-related transmission, even while community transmission was high.
Now these schools implemented and strictly adhere to multiple prevention strategies including
universal mask use, physical distancing. Now breaches and mask use likely explain the few
instances of in-school spread of SARS-CoV-2. So I want to point this out. This is kind of an
interesting issue. And I know I've gotten some less than friendly comments from parents. We can
actually keep children safer in school, give them the social and educational interaction that is
critical. Compared to if they stay home and they're socially isolated, at some point they're going
to get together with their friends. They're going to get together in a suburban home, which is a
high-risk environment. So just really good example here. Another study of elementary schools in Utah.
Maybe people remember this one. This is where they implemented layered prevention strategies,
such as mask wearing, cohorting. And they found very low transmission, secondary attack rate
of less than 1%. I don't think we talked about this one, but the study of the K through 12 schools
in St. Louis. Again, multi-layered prevention strategies in place. Only 2% of the contacts of
the COVID-19 cases tested positive for the virus. This was again in a context of very high community
transmission rates. We have a nice study out of Italy that they reference. They reference a study
in Swiss schools, a German school. And then they sort of finish off their discussion with a study
of private schools that reopened for in-person instruction in Chicago with the implementation of
the layered prevention strategy. And again, minimal in-school transmission. So I do want to point
out this is evidence-based. The CDC is not being whimsical here. We do want those kids in school.
And I will just throw one quick scenario, which I encountered today. It was an outdoor learning
environment. It was school, young kids. And they spent most of the day outside. But then what they
do is they have snack time indoors. So they all go indoors, unmasked, sit around these tables. And
one of the kids had COVID. So what do you think happened? And I was like, why can't they just
have snack time outdoors? Be separated apart. Then there wouldn't have been this exposure. There
wouldn't be a shutdown of the venue for 10 days. So I want to bring up not only can we keep kids
safe, but we can also keep them there in school, not in and out of quarantine and isolation.
All right. Pre-exposure period transmission testing. Never miss an opportunity to test.
Rates are rising as I pointed out. These rates are going to keep rising into the fall and the
winter. We need to keep testing. And we had a nice article comparing the diagnostic accuracy
of point of care, lateral flow antigen testing for SARS-CoV-2 with RT-PCR in primary care. This
was the REAP-2 study for those that were following this. It was published in the Lancet publication
E Clinical Medicine. And I think this was well done taking what we know about rapid testing.
This is a great diagnostic test early in disease in symptomatic individuals. And in this study,
they looked at 2,562 patients with mild to moderate influenza-like symptoms. That classic
that we think about with COVID, but we think about with a spectrum of other respiratory diseases.
You know, fever, malaise, cough. This was a general practice network in an Austrian district.
They were looking at October 22 to November 30, 2020. And all of these individuals, these
patients received a clinical assessment, including both a lateral flow rapid test, so an LFT. And then
all the patients that had suspected COVID-19 also went on to get that RT-PCR testing.
And they reported in this cohort an overall sensitivity for the rapid antigen test in the
acute illness of 95.4% with a specificity of 89.1%. They talk about positive predictive value,
but I'm not going to actually mention that, because as we all know, the sensitivity specificity
gets coupled with the prevalence, the pretest probability. So I'm going to leave it with that.
If you have a low pretest probability, if you have a low prevalence in your community,
that's going to impact the translation of your sensitivity and specificity into positive
predictive values. But what I will also say, and I thought this was really nice,
they had information on my favorite value. What is my favorite value? The CT value,
the cycle threshold values. And they reported what we would expect,
our listeners are thinking, do you think those people that had positive PCRs but a negative
rapid, perhaps they had really high CT values and low viral loads? Yes, that was exactly.
The rapid testing was strongly associated with CT values less than 30, and the duration of
symptoms being in those first three days. So those first three days, the high level of
RNA, that's when we're picking these people up. This is when we're picking up people who are
transmitting the virus or capable of transmitting the virus. And I'm going to throw a little story.
I think people like our stories. This was a sporting, a recent sporting event where they
brought people into a cohort. They did all the right things. They tested people, you know, 72
hours ahead of time. They tested them when they got in. And then day five, someone started to feel
ill. They tested everyone, one person, that symptomatic person was positive. Another person was PCR
positive. But in the high thirties, they pulled those two individuals out, and that was the end
of the spread. So think about different testing, serving different roles. Active vaccination,
we had a bit going on in this realm. I thought this was going to be quiet, but no,
the never miss an opportunity to vaccinate and vaccination is how this pandemic ends.
The FDA updated the J and J vaccine EUA to include Guillain-Barre syndrome. Reports of adverse
events following use of the Janssen COVID-19 vaccine under emergency authorization suggest an
increased risk of Guillain-Barre syndrome during the 42 days following vaccination.
And they're suggesting that this may be a rate of about two to three million to two to three
per million versus a background rate in the population of about one million. So when last,
we hear they're looking at about 100 individuals. The nice thing about the media getting this out
here is now clinicians and patients can report this to VAERS, the vaccine adverse event reporting
system, and actually got a call yesterday from a neurologist colleague of mine who said, you know,
I got a call from a patient. Is there a connection here with Guillain-Barre? I just diagnosed this
individual with Guillain-Barre and about 40 days prior they had gotten their J and J vaccine. So
this is going to help us make that connection. I do want to point out we're talking about, you
know, a rate to three per million. So again, as I always like to say, you are making a decision
between whether you're going to get vaccinated or since COVID is going to be with us, you're going
to get COVID. We saw Guillain-Barre with COVID. We see Guillain-Barre with COVID at a much higher
rate than with vaccine parallel here with influenza. We also got some interim immunogenicity and efficacy
data for the AD26 COVID-2 vaccine. That's the Johnson and Johnson and Johnson and Noviral vector
vaccine. And the authors evaluated antibody and T cell responses on day 239. That's about eight
months after a single shot vaccine regimen, but also six months after a two shot regimen where they
got one shot and they got another. Basically, what they were telling us is they excluded three
individuals or 10 individuals, 10 individuals, three got excluded. So these are not big numbers
here. One of the individuals had a breakthrough infection, nice spike in their antibodies because
that couple others had a big spike in their antibodies turned out they went and got some mRNA vaccines.
After they excluded those folks, they looked at the remaining and they reported that the spike
specific interfere on gamma CD8 and CD4 T cell response showed durability and stability over
this time period, the same with the antibody levels. There also was an interesting comment.
This is really just a one page or so. There's not as much in here as one would like, but there's
a lot packed in there. It looked like the neutralizing antibody breadth was expanding over time. So
that'll be sort of interesting as we get more data on that. So I think this goes along with
what we've seen. Those germinal centers keep sort of churning along. People have said two to four
weeks after that vaccine is when you're protected. Well, it looks like that protection continues
to evolve over some period of time. Now we also had another paper. This was forwarded to me by
my good friend Dr. Amy Rosenfeld. And the paper was effectiveness of SARS-CoV-2 mRNA vaccines for
preventing COVID-19 hospitalizations in the United States. This was a pre-print. This was a
multi-center case control analysis in the U.S. adults hospitalized March 11 through May 5th, 2021.
And the authors looked at 1,210 participants, median age 58 years. 22.8% were black. 13.8%
were Hispanic. 20.6 had immunosuppression. The SARS alpha variant, the SARS-CoV-2 alpha variant
was the most common variant, 59.7% of the sequenced viruses. They reported overall vaccine effectiveness
for preventing hospitalizations was 86.9. They reported that the vaccine effectiveness in patients
with immunosuppression was approximately 60%. And for patients with active solid organ or
hematological malignancies, so solid organ would be, I will say, like a liver cancer, kidney cancer,
or a hematological malignancy, things like leukemia. The estimated efficacy was still over 50%.
So I do want to sort of point this out. And now we've seen a lot of these serology studies.
For me, this was the really interesting part of the study was looking at individuals with
active cancer, immune suppression. Despite those serology studies, which seem to have said,
oh, these people, they don't show this immunological evidence, tell them that they should get vaccinated
but act like they're not vaccinated. We're not seeing hospitals fill with these immunosuppressed
people. A immunosuppressed person who gets a high antibody level, we don't tell them to rush out to
a big party. But still, that individual who does not show a positive serology test, we're getting
growing experience as well as evidence that those serology antibodies do not correlate with
necessary with immunity. And we are seeing benefit in this population. So all right,
the period of viral replication, the viral symptom phase, right, the time for monitoring
and monoclonals, you know, and as I like to say, where you get tested, as ideally, we get your monoclonals.
We may be moving away from the BAM Linivimab at TESS of a MAB into other cocktails and other
therapies, but we did get a publication in the New England Journal of Medicine, BAM Linivimab,
plus a TESS of a MAB in mild or moderate COVID-19. And this was done back before we were seeing a
lot of the resistant variants. So this was a phase three trial in which ambulatory patients
with mild or moderate COVID-19, who were at high risk for progression to severe disease,
were randomly assigned randomly assigned in a one-to-one ratio to receive a single intravenous
infusion of either this monoclonal antibody combination agent or placebo within three days
after a laboratory diagnosis of severe acute respiratory syndrome. So SARS-CoV-2 infection,
COVID-19. So nice and early, where we want to see it, the high-risk population, the primary outcome
was the overall clinical status of the patients defined as COVID-19-related hospitalization or
death from any cause by day 29. So a total of over 1,000, it was 1,035 patients underwent
randomization and received the infusion or placebo. So by T29, 2.1% of the monoclonal
infuse, the BAM Linivimab, a TESS of a MAB group, had a COVID-19-related hospitalization or death
as compared to 7% in the placebo group. So a relative risk difference, 70%. So about a 30%
risk reduction here, nice p-value, 0.001. No deaths occurred in any of the people that got the
monoclonals. There were 10 deaths in the placebo group. Also a little more data that there was a
greater reduction from baseline in the viral load, people getting monoclonals versus not.
So we are, this is, I think, proof of principle of the monoclonals. We are shifting to the right
monoclonal for the variant that you might have. But I continue to reinforce, this is incredibly
powerful effective therapy. All right. So more negative data on Ivermectin with the publication
of Ivermectin for the treatment of COVID-19, a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized
controlled trials. This was published in CID, clinical infectious disease. Now I don't want to
spend too much time in this paper. As the authors point out themselves, based on the review, I'm
going to quote here, the quality of evidence was low or very low for all outcomes. And their
comment was that based upon available evidence, Ivermectin should only be used within clinical
trials. And I have to say, I was a little surprised that this paper was published in CID.
As the evidence they were looking at was really very low for all of the outcomes.
And I think if they had sort of gone in the other direction saying we have really low
poor quality evidence suggesting you should use Ivermectin, I don't think it would have gotten
published. There is a lot of Ivermectin being used out there. What I take away from this is we
really need a proper trial, not lots of anecdotes, not lots of small trials. We don't need sites
with Ivermectin in the URL to go. We also have sort of a word of warning. We have a lot of folks
out there using veterinary Ivermectin products, random doses, random periods of time, no clear
timing relative to infection. This just seems like a terrible idea all around. I do think that
we need really clear guidance on the role of Ivermectin either way. If we have clear,
well-controlled trials that say Ivermectin provides some benefit in some people at some
time, that's great. If it comes out the other way, we need to know that because right now this
is a bit of the Wild West. We have believers, we have non-believers, it's very emotional.
We need to know if this has a role in the disease. And I think this just sort of, if you like Ivermectin,
you're angry about this trial. If you're not excited about Ivermectin, this is the,
you know, I've always said, I don't know if this has, we just don't have the quality data,
we need to guide us in this issue. All right, I'm going to get right here to the tail phase
along COVID. And I want to say the CDC seems to have been really busy the last couple of weeks,
everyone else was celebrating the fourth, the CDC was, you know, mandatory workday.
On July 12th, there was an update on their post-COVID conditions page and under the
prevention section, there were two, what I thought were interesting comments. One,
the best way to prevent post-COVID conditions is by getting vaccinated against COVID-19
as soon as you can. COVID-19 vaccination is recommended for all people, ages 12 and older,
including if you had COVID-19 or a post-COVID condition. Now vaccination is not 100%. We certainly
have seen individuals with breakthrough infections that go on to get long COVID,
but that is a relatively small number compared to unvaccinated individuals.
Next number two, although I thought this was interesting, although media articles have reported
that some people with post-COVID conditions say their symptoms improved after being vaccinated,
studies are needed to determine the effects of vaccination on post-COVID conditions.
Then, under what CDC is doing, they state rapid and multi-year studies are underway to further
investigate post-COVID conditions. These studies will help us better understand post-COVID conditions
and how to treat patients with these longer-term effects. Now I think this should be reassuring
to the millions, and it is millions at this point here in the US alone, suffering with post-COVID
conditions. There was a BBC that I listened to earlier today, really talking about how the UK
has recognized the post-COVID conditions. The US has recognized the post-COVID conditions,
but the world is still dismissing this. And just think of all the COVID cases throughout the world
and all the individuals that are going to suffer as a consequence of that.
So there's really a commitment here in the United States, I have to say, there's funding,
there's an organized effort, there are hard-working, brilliant, committed people working on this issue,
and I am hoping that this science gets accomplished, and we can really help these individuals.
So before we go to the emails, I want to remind everyone, we're getting near the end of July,
we're almost at the end of our foundation international medical relief for children fundraiser.
And along those same lines, this is critical. This is an organization that works throughout
the world, working in those areas that are still being ravaged by the pandemic. The numbers are
going up throughout the world. They are not going down. People are getting sick, people are ending
up in the hospital, people are dying, people are recovering, but then continuing to have long
COVID symptoms. So this is not over. Help us and help FIMRIC, go to parasiteswithoutborders.com,
click on the donate button and help us with this work.
Time for some email questions for Daniel. If you'd like to send one in, the address is
Daniel at microb.tv. Now, I had one here queued up from D who wants to know what's going on with
Ivermectin. She has friends who are trying to get it online, prescription and so forth, but I
think you answered it pretty much, Daniel. So I will publish the letter in the letters part,
but I think we don't need to address it. So D, I'm sure you got an answer from Daniel just now.
So George writes, my four-year-old son had a surgically repaired VSD and ASD at six months old. His
annual checkups have shown normal heart function since then. As you know, he's ineligible for a
vaccine yet, but as we get closer to an approval for his age group, I wanted to ask whether the
recent myocarditis risk would give you pause if he were eligible today. It's frequently mentioned
that those who show symptoms of myocarditis or pericarditis post-vaccine respond well to treatment,
but it seems to go on set of what that treatment entails and how that applies to those who have
had congenital heart defects. As you know, they have a lifelong higher risk of endocarditis.
I'm leaning towards vaccination, but wanted to understand the risks better, especially at this age group.
And so this is great. And I want to say, I think it's great that you're asking questions.
There's no problem asking questions about vaccinations. There's no problem wanting to be
informed when you make this decision. We've moved past sort of the cattle approach of hurting
people through these giant centers. And particularly now, as we're looking at younger individuals,
there's a different metric. You look at an 80-year-old getting COVID versus vaccination.
There's no, there's really nothing. It's very obvious that vaccination is there.
But let's look at this case. So what we're looking at this point, unfortunately, is COVID is here
to stay. So your calculation is the risk of vaccination versus the risk of COVID. So focusing
just on the cardiac issues. I think I mentioned this last time, a friend of mine, Michael Amala,
Dr. Michael Amala, actually as a cardiologist, went through kind of the risks of heart issues
with COVID. And it's probably a couple percent is the low bar. Probably at least 2 percent of
people that could COVID will have some evidence of heart issues. Some of that heart issues will
continue farther along. If you do more sensitive testing, it might be as high as 50 percent.
COVID triggers inflammation that affects the heart in a large number of individuals.
So I see someone like your child that you're describing. And I say, boy, this is not a person
that you want at risk for COVID. The vaccine is not zero in terms of risk, but the risk there
is much lower with vaccination than it would be with having COVID. So that's the way I would
weigh that decision. Protect your child so that they don't get COVID. Take that tiny risk when
you know potentially it's going to happen with the vaccination. What is that treatment? It's
ibuprofen. It's a leave. It's about 48 hours of taking it easy, and then the child is better.
Quite a bit different than so many of the children that we've seen with long-term effects after COVID.
James writes, dear Dr. Griffin, I'm so grateful for your podcast to the point the 20-something
year-old son of one of my co-workers tested positive today for COVID-19. He reported symptoms
yesterday. Should he be given monoclonal therapy or is such therapy reserved for higher risk patients?
Yeah, this is almost the exact question I was just answering earlier today. It's a
colleague of mine, had a family member who ended up, and actually, in that case, it was a second
infection, which just troubles me. With these individuals who are 20 years old, they're considered
at low risk. Even though the monoclonal antibodies are considered at very low risk safe therapy,
we still have a limit to the EUA. These are sitting on shelves, but you have to go through and say,
is this an individual who maybe their BMI is above 25? Actually, and you can Google, I'm going to
say Google or Search, Internet Search, the Regeneron monoclonal fact sheet, and there's a list.
But if there's diabetes, if there's any of these things, reach out to a clinician, have them help
you work through this. If you've got a 20-year-old with a BMI of 26, they would qualify and be
eligible for monoclonals, and it would make sense. So there's combination here of a risk-benefit
ratio, but there's also a limited access, because this is still EUA products. These don't have quite
the experience where we would start extending that off-label.
And Martin from the UK writes, I'm seeking facts or merely off-the-record opinion as to whether
Pfizer or other vaccinated asthma patients with occasional recourse to prednisolone run the risk
of negating the benefits of vaccine effectiveness, or of significantly reducing immunity by
medicating with low dose prednisolone, say, daily five to 10 eggs for a week or two. I'm assuming
more typical rescue dosage of prednisolone. 40-migs daily would certainly best be avoided,
unless the degree of exacerbation presented its own major health risk. Are you aware of any
research on this topic? Could you venture a generalized opinion? What are the respiratory
team in your hospital advising such asthma patients to do about oral steroid use during COVID?
Also, is there a similar vaccine-negating or immunity-lowering risk for inhaler usage,
where maximum licensed daily-inhaled steroids have been prescribed?
Okay, so these are great, this great line of questioning. So we do have some data, at least on
the serologies, right, that if someone gets vaccinated, and this makes sense immunologically,
we would expect there to be a less robust antibody response. I don't think the steroids are going
to have as much of an impact on your T-cell response, but we are in general recommending
if you can stay off of immunosuppressants for a couple weeks before that vaccination.
Hopefully stay off till you finish the cycle, so try to reduce that if possible.
Inhaled are definitely going to have a lower systemic level than taken orally,
so we would think of that as preferable. We do think these individuals are getting protection
from the vaccines, but what we're trying to do is limit the drug and other effects on the immune
response. That's COVID-19 clinical update number 71 with Dr. Daniel Griffin. Thank you, Daniel.
Oh, thank you, Vincent. Thank you, everybody, and be safe.
