This week in virology, the podcast about viruses, the kind that make you sick.
From MicrobeTV, this is Twiv, this week in virology. Episode 783, recorded on June 22, 2021.
I'm Vincent Rackeniello, and you're listening to the podcast all about viruses. Joining me
today from New York, Daniel Griffin. Hello, everyone.
Daniel, I noticed that the U.S. vaccination is just approaching 50% for fully vaccinated.
That doesn't seem like a lot, does it? No, no. That was my Anthony Fauci, you know, where I
put my hand up and shake my head. So listening to another podcast the other day,
it's one that Andy Slavitt does. And he was interviewing somebody from Facebook,
and they were talking about the fact that 65% of the
miss and disinformation regarding vaccines comes from 12 individuals, 12 individuals.
And they just pump the stuff out, you know, and they get banned from Twitter, but then they're
still on Facebook. And yeah, I mean, you know, this active disinformation is killing people.
And, you know, I was on a call with a United Health Group, sort of the Optum, one of the
higher groups. And there was a lot of pessimism about, you know, the people that aren't going to
get vaccinated, just not going to get vaccinated. I don't think that's true. I mean, these individuals
are still spending an incredible amount of time, millions of dollars to introduce fear,
to just make stuff up about the vaccines. And one of the comments, I think it was a Kaiser
survey where they asked people. And four out of five people who are not vaccinated
believe something about the vaccine. That's not true. They were told something, they were
misinformed. So yeah, we really have to make a difference here. And a lot of it, you know,
how do you get someone who's not vaccinated to get vaccinated? Number one is you listen,
you stop, you take a deep breath, you listen, what are your concerns? You don't ridicule them.
And a lot of times they've been told something by someone, and it's just not true. And I think
we need to have patients, we need to have humility, we need to reach out to these individuals.
Because I think that if they actually knew the facts, a large number of people would come to the
conclusion that it's not so important to be part of a tribe that you're going to put the lives of
yourself and your loved ones at risk by choosing to get COVID, as opposed to choosing a much safer
option, which is the vaccines. What is the motivation of these 12 individuals who spread
misinformation? You know, I'm speculating, of course, we do know that there's a big sort of
financial incentive. There's a lot of power that comes along with, you know, stirring up the masses.
I think it was disturbing to find out, right, what happened in France where scientists were
actually taking money to sign letters. It's really, you know, at some point you can't have a price,
your price has to be truth and honesty. And I think these individuals need to look in the mirror and
ask, like, is that is that blood money worth it? Are you willing to take this money? Because this is
not honest scientific discussion. This is pure blatant misinformation. It's just wrong.
Okay. All right.
I don't know if that's I don't think that's political. I feel like that's just honesty.
But anyway, so let's let's start off with two quotes from a rather impressive woman.
And I'm going to give the quotes, then we'll be like our four second pause while people
see if they can remember who who said these things. The work of today is the history of tomorrow
and we are its makers. And the second quotation to be inspired is great, but to be an inspiration
is an honor. Juliet Gordon Lowe. I am impressed. You don't even have daughters.
So yes, that was Juliet Gordon Lowe, the founder of the Girl Scouts of America.
I do have a daughter. I do have a daughter.
You do have a daughter? Yes. And she would, that's why I know.
Did you see there was a pause there, everyone? It took me so in a moment to remember.
Yeah, I just listened to you. I was like, wait a second. All right. So yes. Yeah.
So Juliet Gordon Lowe was the founder of Girl Scouts of America, really a tremendous organization.
So yeah, and really just a really inspiring woman. And you know, I don't know if people were aware,
but the Girl Scouts of America actually did a get the vote out. And now I know there's discussions
about get the vaccine out. Having Girl Scouts try to help with these efforts. I have two daughters.
I know that right away without a pause. And they both actually went all the way through,
became sort of these gold star at the end. They did their gold awards. And actually the last,
actually Eloise's Gold Award was the service dog project and raising a service dog, doing the
puppy rearing and then doing information sessions about it. So tremendous organization, tremendous
woman. And I think right now when we look at these individuals that are not vaccinated,
who is the most influential person? It's your friend. It's your family. So reach out to your
friends and family. Reach out to people you care about. Have honest, respectful discussions about
the vaccines. We can make a difference. We can get over this hump. Hundreds of people do not need
to keep dying every day in the US. Thousands of people do not need to keep dying around the world
every day. We have safe, incredibly effective vaccines. All right, so let me update on what's
going on. As people know, the trends are not great. We went from a cruise ship of people dying
per day in America down to a jumbo jet crashing every day as far as numbers of people dying.
That's not great. And the numbers are going up. But I will say at least in our local area,
when we are seeing vaccinated people get infected, it's mild. It's very rare for them to end up in
the hospital. It's incredibly rare for them to die, right? We're going from a one in 30 chance of
death in an unvaccinated to a one in a million. And we're going to talk a little bit about kids
here in a moment. There's a lot of fear still in the media about this. The fear should be
driving people to vaccination. But once you're vaccinated, that is a very good place to be.
One of my friends and colleagues actually wrote a paper, maybe a couple papers in the last year,
Denise Brennan Ryder, she's an Irish Canadian. She's also a mother. And she was sharing with me
recently just some of the struggles that she's been going through as a mom with issues with
access to vaccination and concerns that her children have. And I just, we need to sort of
balance. And as I talk about kids, I always say kids are at low risk, but they're not at no risk.
But there is a balance here with all the fear. The vaccines continue to work. Even when we hear
about these new variants, they continue to be very effective at preventing serious disease,
preventing hospitalization. We would love if they were 100% for our herd immunity aspect.
But that's only a small part of the story. And that should be sort of balanced with all the
fear that we see in the media. So just want to sort of start with that. But let's get right
on to kids. And I'm going to talk about long COVID in kids, because I think this is part of
the metric, part of the equation that people are not considering. And I actually had a gentleman
email me directly earlier today. And I really sort of taken him back because his daughter's
pediatrician, she's an eligible adolescent, the US pediatrician was not really in favor of
vaccination and had not recommended vaccination. So I was a bit shocked. And I know sometimes
people say, well, you know, only a few hundred children have died while we shut down everything.
Only several thousand children ended up in the hospital. But what about kids that got COVID?
How are they doing two, three months down the road? Is long COVID a significant issue in children?
So we just saw the study, long-term symptoms after SARS-CoV-2 infection in children and adolescents
published in JAMA, the Journal of the American Medical Association. And the authors addressed a
significant issue that we really need to know about when we're looking at return to school this
fall, right? We have a lot of people saying, eh, get the kids back in school. Not a big issue
if kids get COVID. I don't want my kid wearing a mask or anyone else. Well, we know about deaths.
We know about hospitalizations. What about long COVID? So this was a longitudinal cohort study
investigating SARS-CoV-2 seroprevalence in 55 randomly selected schools in areas in Switzerland.
And they chose a linguistically and ethnically diverse population of 1.5 million residents in
both urban and rural settings. So we're getting a nice cross-section here. The investigators
collected blood for serological analysis and then used questionnaires to assess the symptoms.
They compared children who tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 with those who tested negative during a
period October, November 2020. Ultimately, over 1,355 children were included in the analysis.
And what did they find? They found that the most frequently reported symptoms lasting more than
12 weeks. I just want to repeat that. 12 weeks, right? So three months after these children had
been infected with COVID, 3% of them were still reporting that significant fatigue. 2% were still
reporting difficulty concentrating. Another 2% were reporting an increased need for sleep.
Now, there are background rates. You know, we assess these symptoms. So just think about asking
1,000 kids, you know, and there is sort of a background rate. But overall, what they were seeing
is about 4% of the serology positive children were still having symptoms 3 months later. So that's
1 in 25 kids who gets COVID is still having issues 3 months later, right? Symptoms consistent with
long COVID. So I just I want people to think about this when you send kids back to school.
So let's say you're your child. Let's say you have a daughter like Vincent now remembers and she goes
to class. And you know, there's 25 kids in the class. And we say, oh, you know what, not a big deal.
We'll just let them all get COVID. It's not a big deal. One of those 25 kids is still going to be
sick 3 months later. I have to say as a parent that that's too high for me 1 in 25. So we look at
the risks of vaccination. You know, we're talking about short lived myocardial cardiac inflammation
maybe for a couple days that gets better with over the counter medicine rates of maybe 1 in 100,000
1 in a million things like that versus 1 in 25 being sick for 3 months having problems going to
school. So I think when people talk about the risks in children, you can't just look at deaths.
You can't just look at hospitalizations. It's the same as adults. You've got to look at the whole
picture. And when someone has long COVID, that's that's a disaster. That's a tragedy in my book.
Now we did get some some good news in the realm of pediatrics. And this was what about those kids
who had that multi-system inflammatory syndrome. So there was a publication in pediatrics. That's
the official journal of the American Academy of Pediatrics. Longitudinal outcomes for multi-system
inflammatory syndrome in children. And the authors reported on all of the 45 children that had been
admitted to Columbia Presbyterian Hospital. It's like about a block or two from where
Vincent is sitting right now. And they followed them actually out to four to nine months. And they
found that basically about a month, a lot of the inflammatory markers were going down. When they
got far out, only one child was still having persistent mild dysfunction. One had mild mitral
and tricuspid regurgitation. But in general, the kids were getting better. So I think that is
that's reassuring. We don't have longer term outcome. But the authors actually concluded
the majority of children with Miss C. So that's multi-system inflammatory syndrome of children
present critically ill. But most inflammatory and cardiac manifestations go on to resolve
in a period of months. So rapidly. So that's nice to know. I know people have always asked
what happened to these kids. Now, sticking with children here, the American Academy of Pediatrics
came out with some recent guidance with a statement that got a bit oppressed. Some people
are unhappy about it. So let me go through the high points of that statement because some people
are asking how do we take this statement and mesh it with what we're hearing from the CDC
as we're looking at school opening. So the first part is in line. American Academy of Pediatrics
is saying all eligible individuals should receive the COVID-19 vaccine. So that pediatrician, I'm
not sure what professional organization he gets his guidance from. But the American Academy of
Pediatrics is recommending that we go ahead and vaccinate all the eligible information.
The other is, and this is the thing that was controversial, all students older than two years
and all school staff should wear face masks at school unless medical or developmental conditions
prohibit use. Why? So they do. I think they knew that this would get some feedback. So they go
ahead and they give us five reasons. So the AAP recommends universal masking in school at this
time for the following five reasons. One, a significant portion of the student population
is not eligible for vaccination. So I think that's something. Second, protection of unvaccinated
students from COVID-19 and to reduce transmission. This is sort of coupled with the fact that we do
not have a system to monitor the vaccine status among the students, the teachers and staff.
And I think we've all had that experience. You know, you go into a supermarket in an area where maybe
50% of the people are vaccinated, but no one's wearing a mask because people who are vaccinated
don't need to wear a mask. Well, people who are unvaccinated have got the masks off too. So
they're pointing that out. There's really no good system for knowing who's vaccinated
and enforcing masks only for the vaccinated unvaccinated. Point three, potential and this ties right in
potential difficulty in monitoring or enforcing mask policies for those who are not vaccinated.
The ability of schools, and this is right in the same, to have consistent messaging,
expectations, enforcement and compliance without needing to try to monitor vaccination status.
Four, and this is sort of relates to the community, right? The biggest risk for a child is what's
going on in the community around the school. Schools are often safer than the environment
around. And so the AAP says the possibility of low vaccination uptake within the surrounding
school community. And then finally five, and this we'll be touching on as we go further,
continued concerns for variants that are more easily spread among children, adolescents and
adults. So they've got their recommendation for face masks at school, and they've got their
explanation for why they're saying that. All right, now pre-exposer testing, right? So testing
never miss an opportunity to test. Now I know when I talked about some of the other guidance,
part of the school reopening guidance is having testing strategies. But I'm excited that we have
some data now to understand what's going on potentially with transmission with the Delta
variant. What is going on? Is it spreading faster? What are the kinetics here? What's happening? So
we got an interesting publication, viral infection and transmission in a large, well-traced outbreak
caused by the Delta SARS-CoV-2 variant. And this was published by a group that was looking at
cases in China. Now I've talked a bit about how sloppy the word transmissible is,
and that when we hear that a certain virus, a certain variant is becoming dominant,
we really need to understand the mechanism behind this variant's fitness advantage.
And I think that this paper was a step in the right direction. So did we get any answers? Well,
the authors investigated data from quarantine subjects in this Delta variant outbreak,
and compared it to previous 2020 epidemic outbreaks caused by earlier variants.
So a couple of questions that they tried to address. One is there a shorter reproductive
time. So let me explain a little bit about what I mean by that. So you get exposed to someone who
has SARS-CoV-2 infection, who has COVID-19, who is contagious, you have your exposure event.
Now what is the time from exposure till you test positive or till you test positive and have
enough virus that you can transmit it to the next individual? So this is the time for infection to
becoming PCR positive and being able to give the virus to the next person, sort of a nuance of that.
Now their results showed that the time interval from exposure to first PCR positivity in the
quarantine population was four days versus six days. So six days was what we saw back in the 2020,
and now we're seeing four days. So that's an interesting issue, and I'm going to talk a little
bit about whether our experience meshes with this. The other thing that they saw, and I think this
needs to be taken in context, that first positive test that they were seeing was a thousand times
higher as far as the RNA copy number. So what we think we're seeing here is from zero. At day
four people are already PCR positive, but they're already at a level of virus that makes them
contagious. Now when we talked about day six turning PCR positive, usually at day six they
were PCR positive, but at a high CT value, so a high cycle threshold, low level of virus,
not quite transmitting, so you could pull them out before they spread it to the next person.
Usually it was day seven that they were contagious. So instead of seven days from exposure to
spreading to the next person, this may be shortened to only four days. So we're thinking that there
is a more rapid rise from negative to infectious. People have looked at that thousand times higher,
and I want to point out that's just looking at the first positive test. That's not the peak.
We don't have the area under the curve. We did not follow these people every single day to see
whether there's been a change in the duration at high levels, so the area under the curve,
the period that they might become infectious. And I've sort of been asking, does this really
mesh with our experience? And one of the things our listeners may know is we do these large
screening programs for the movie industry, where we test thousands of people every night
with the idea that we're going to catch them early when they first get positive,
and that we've got this day before they become infectious. So someone tests positive on a Wednesday
night. Usually it's a high CT value. We say, that's great. We grab you, we pull you out. We've been
doing this for over a year without having any issues. What we're now seeing, unfortunately,
is we're seeing a lot of people testing positive. The concern is when they test positive that night,
they may have already been infectious in the latter half of the day. When we're talking to
our outpatient providers, when someone says, Boy, I felt crummy for about a day. So I decided to
finally get tested. Now you get them a PCR test. There's a 36 hour resulting delay. You call them
and you say, John, your test is positive. We got to figure out who you may have exposed.
When you test those people that they've exposed, those people are already positive,
and they're already positive at high level. So this data is meshing with our experience.
And as you can imagine, this really challenges our Tetris, our contact tracing paradigm.
If by the time you tell someone that they're PCR positive, everyone they've exposed is also
already PCR positive at a contagious level. It's already sort of spread to the next year,
and it's kind of a dominoes type phenomenon. So this is one paper. This is meshing with our
experience, but we need more data to help us with this because this is a problem. If it is a shorter
incubation time, shorter from time to exposure to spreading, that could explain a lot of what we're
seeing. It also is really relevant to how we're going to address this.
If I may jump in, I was hoping that my dramatic pause would get you pulled in Vincent.
Just two things first. So the shorter serial interval, that's what this is.
That could account for a more rapid spread, but it doesn't mean the virus is more transmissible
intrinsically. It just reproduces faster, and therefore can go from one host to another.
Quicker in, as you said, people are infectious sooner, and that can result in more people being
infected as a consequence. That's possible. But I would say it's not intrinsic,
greater transmissibility of the virus. And then I agree we need more data on that.
The other issue is that PCR, a thousand times, that might not be infectious virus. So I think
at some point, people need to do infectious virus measurements. We have to stop depending
on PCR, because I can imagine a variant throws off more MRNAs, and that's going to show up
positive in the PCR, but it's not infectious virus. So nobody has done that for any of the
variants yet, and I'm a little bit frustrated at that. Yeah, no, and I share your frustration,
and I think that this is really, from my point, you can't just use the word transmissibly. You
always say, what are you talking about? Because if it's a shorter incubation period, so many of
our rules about when you contact trace, how long a person you say, we need to know the
kinetics of infectious, viable virus for all the variants. We need to keep doing the research.
We can't say, oh, we've got this for the, you know, because this is this is a problem.
And I think also people have probably seen the Olympics when people are, quote, unquote, testing
positive. What does that mean? Are they having a low level of RNA positivity? They actually have
viable infectious virus. Do we need to pull Olympic athletes who've been vaccinated or
young and healthy out for 10 days? Because that's what we did, you know, a year ago.
Yeah, we need we can't be sloppy with our language because it matters. It affects
it affects what we do. It affects people. All right, active vaccination. Never miss an
opportunity to vaccinate vaccination is how this pandemic ends and no one is safe until we're all
safe. And I know I get a lot of questions actually seem like I got a lot more this week and I'm not
sure if it's that we're hitting a particular population, but they want to know, you know, if I had a
COVID-19 before, if I had a natural infection, do I really need to get vaccinated? Maybe I'm just
okay. And so I'm just going to take a little aside to, you know, I think all the clinicians
that are getting these questions, I'm going to answer it for all of you. We do have information
on this topic in three forms. So this is I had COVID-19. Do I need to get vaccinated? So one,
we have a number of the serology and T cell studies, right? There was that nice paper in
cell that we discussed back in June, reduced neutralization of SARS-CoV-2-B1617 by vaccine
and convalescent serum, right? Because people really are now asking about the delta variant.
You know, and we've talked a little bit about neutralizing antibody convalescent plasma. We
also had reduced sensitivity of SARS-CoV-2 variant delta to antibody neutralization published in
nature. And that was just this month. Both papers suggesting convalescent plasma was about four
times less potent against the delta variant. But if we've discussed many times, we don't really know,
you know, what that translates into. We really sort of think that T cells are important.
So we have some information on T cells in the paper, immunological memory to SARS-CoV-2
assessed for up to eight months after infection. This is by Shane Crotty, an Los Androsetti's
group. And this was in science. But, you know, here there's a couple things that we saw. And I'm
going to throw in words like only to sort of emphasize things. Only 70% of individuals possessed
detectable CD8 positive T cell memory at one month after infection that declined to 50% by
six to eight months after infection. Not great, but CD4 T cell memory. 93% of subjects had
detectable SARS-CoV-2 memory at a month after infection. And this remained high for six to eight
months. So we also see T follicular helper cells being maintained. So we're sort of getting
mixed here. Now, we did have the preprint also by these same gentleman, low dose mRNA 1273 COVID-19
vaccine generates durable T cell memory and antibodies enhanced by preexisting cross-reactive T cell
memory, where they report that spike. CD8 positive T cells were generated in 88% of subjects
with equivalent percentages of CD8 positive T cell memory responders at six months post
vaccine. So you're sort of seeing here that there looks like when we're looking at these lab-based
studies of B cells T cells and serology, vaccines do look like they're a little bit better. And we
have good data on the efficacy. We also have the reinfection studies. That's sort of when the
rubber meets the road. And what happens when people have had natural infection and now they're
exposed again. And I think we discussed before the siren study out of England. And that was SARS-CoV-2
infection rates of antibody positive compared with antibody negative health care workers in
England, a large multi-center prospective cohort study siren. And here this was Lancet suggesting
a median duration effect of seven months at about 83% from prior infection with the same variant,
right? So sort of raises concerns. And then we have this growing experience. What are we seeing
as clinicians? And we are seeing our own growing experience of people who were infected early in
the pandemic. So a year or more ago, now coming in, testing PCR positive, having symptoms and some
of them not doing well. I think I may have shared the experience of the young woman who had long
COVID after first infection, did not get a vaccine. And a couple weeks ago, she started to get ill
again and again had a second infection. And I think now people ask, oh, can you test to see if
it's a delta variant? Well, it's almost 90% of the sequences we're now seeing across the country are
delta variants. So I think that, you know, the data may not be as compelling as some of the
anti vaccinators or the hesitant might want to be. But we have really good compelling data on the
safety and efficacy of vaccine. So we are across the board recommending that all people get vaccinated
even if they have prior infection. All right. Now the period of detectable viral replication,
this is going to be an exciting part. I'm looking for some emails. We had some very
disturbing news, right? So this is the time for monitoring and monoclonals, not the time for
antibiotics. But there was a bit of drama because a preprint that had been posted,
suggesting that a randomized control trial demonstrated a 90% reduction in mortality and
substantial in Ivermectin treated patients may have been something that never happened. So a London
medical student named Jack Lawrence was the Woodward and Bernstein in this story, if people
remember all the president's men. And he was investigating this preprint. And he discovered
initially that the introductory section of the document appeared to have been almost entirely
plagiarized and then run through a Thesaurus program. And it appears that the authors,
they pulled entire paragraphs out of press releases and websites about Ivermectin.
And then they changed these key words. The data appears to have been completely falsified.
The tables in the article mathematically impossible. Apparently the study never happened.
They just invented the study, invented the data, put it out there, really just a case of scientific
fraud. So this data was part of a lot of these meta-analysis where people were saying,
Oh, Ivermectin, it looks so promising. It's a crime to humanity that we're not using it when
there's this study with a 90% mortality reduction. My hope is that all the people that have braced
Ivermectin and are using it based on this kind of data will rethink their position and embrace
the importance of honest scientific investigation. So now if someone is passionate about Ivermectin
and they want to know, don't just make up data, don't just invent a study and put a preprint
right now. And we've talked a little bit about this active sex, the COVID-19 study of repurposed
medications is recruiting to properly study Ivermectin, fluvoxamine, and fluticosome. So
if you're passionate, if you're excited about Ivermectin, you know, either enroll, direct your
patients this way. We need good science, don't just make up science. All right.
A little more information on the reliability of point of care rapid testing with the Abbott by
next now with the publication of multidisciplinary assessment of the Abbott by next now SARS-CoV-2
point of care antigen test in the context of emerging viral variants and self administration
was published in nature scientific reports. And I know a lot of people I get, you know, at least
every day, hey, do our tests still work against the Delta variant. You know, and I've talked a
little bit about, you know, how it may go from these low level to high levels in hours instead of a
day plus. And so what the authors here looked at the by next now, they looked at the Quidel
Sophia to SARS test. They looked at the BD barator. They were all 100% concorded with RTPCR with
CT values of less than 20. And then they started to lose sensitivity at higher CT values, or we
translate that into lower RNA levels. So just a reminder, CT stands for cycle threshold. This
is how many times you've got to run that PCR or that amplification before you get a positive
signal. The higher the number of cycles, the lower amount of RNA that you started with.
And as Vincent likes to point out, that's just RNA. That doesn't necessarily tell us about
infectious virus. All right. And I think there's a correlation more in time than levels. So that's
important. But what about this? You know, I get calls all the time. You know, is there one rapid
test better than the other? And there are a lot of publications that come out and it seems like
every time a publication comes out, I get a question. And just to give some context here,
there are over 300 COVID-19 tests and collection kits authorized by the FDA. Over 200 molecular
tests, we have 11 antigen tests. What about this? So the specificity, right? People say,
Oh, well, not only are they're less sensitive, but they're less specific. If I get a positive
on an antigen, I don't trust it as much. I'm going to say that if you get a positive test,
the specificity of antigen tests is generally as high as our nucleic acid amplification tests,
which means that a positive test on an antigen test is as reliable as a positive test on a PCR.
There's a lot of experience, right? But just remember your prevalence of the community is
going to help you interpret whether that positive test makes sensor or not. Now, what about
sensitivity? Really straightforward. This is related to the amount of antigen that is present.
If it's the first couple days that one to three days that corresponds with a CT value of less than
20, as pointed out, we're getting sensitivities. We're getting concordance right up there at about
100%. Once you get out to day seven, day eight, when that RNA level is dropping, when you're not
really having much in the way of antigen, these tests are going to turn negative. So they're actually
helpful when you think about what it's testing for. These are great at picking up that infectious
period of time. They correspond with the infectious period of time. PCRs can sometimes stay positive
for weeks for months. All right. And there was a really nice, I'm going to say Cochrane review,
which they keep updating. Rapid point of care antigen and molecular-based tests for diagnosis
of SARS-CoV-2. This is a 409-page document. So a nice light read. And it goes through different
tests, their sensitivity and specificity at different CT levels. And so it's an excellent
document. So don't let that latest publication shake your Earth, go ahead, look at this accumulation
of data. Rapid point of care antigen tests have a role. That testing delay is leaving someone
who's potentially infectious, wandering around, spreading it to others. All right. Another article
on it describes that water is wet. Smart Chrysoplexus say. This is how antibacterial therapy is not
helpful for the treatment of a virus. And this is the article effective oral azithromycin versus
placebo on COVID-19 symptoms in outpatients with SARS-CoV-2 infection, a randomized control trial
published in JAMA. And I think this is interesting. Some people think that, well, maybe the azithromycin
will make my patient feel a little bit better. It does not. You're just, you know, inducing
antibacterial resistance. So they did not see that antibiotics help viral infections.
All right. We're getting near the end. So long COVID, right? I mentioned last time that post
acute COVID syndrome. Apparently, when you're on a call with the CDC, they don't like the word.
They don't like the phrase long COVID. They feel happier when you say packs. But I like long COVID
because I think it actually points to something within the larger world of packs of post acute
COVID syndromes. But what about the rest of the world? We talked about the U.S. and the UK.
So we did see the article post discharge symptoms among hospitalized COVID-19 patients in Nigeria,
a single center study, published in the American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene.
And basically, what they were pointing out is this was a small study, but the majority of their
discharged patients were actually having symptoms continuing for months after discharge.
I know a lot of people, you know, were very focused on the U.S., but outside the U.S., things
continue to be really difficult. There was a nice paper, COVID-19 therapeutics for low and
middle-income countries, a review of candidate agents with potential for near-term use and impact.
And this was actually, you know, I think what you would expect. You've got to think about the
resources in the area relative, you know, injectable tools, expensive therapies are not going to
be able to play as big a part in this area. And there was actually a nice article,
COVID-19 in Africa, a lesson in solidarity published in Lancet. Actually, my friend,
Dr. Titus DiBali from Malawi brought this to my attention. But just pointing out, you can't just
send vaccines to these countries. The same complexity applies there. You've got to have needles,
you've got to have syringes, you've got to have trained people, and you actually have
vaccine hesitancy and an interest in education in these areas, just like you do in the United
States and Western Europe in many parts of the world. So to get those vaccines into arms
is going to require a pretty large effort. And I actually made Vincent record this a little
earlier today, because I'm going to be talking with the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation COVID-19
Task Force later to talk a little bit about these challenges. So as I like to say, we are not safe
until everyone is safe. And to conclude on that note, just a couple weeks left here
for our campaign to support Foundation International Medical Relief of Children. So go to parasites
without borders. Before the end of July, we will double your donation. We're going to try to get up
to a level where we can double that $20,000 and give a full $40,000 to support Foundation
International Medical Relief of Children's efforts throughout the world.
Daniel, when I went to our new office this week, I walked in and the lady shouted,
parasites is here. All right, time for some questions for Daniel. You can send yours to
Daniel at microbe.tv Kevin writes his favorite public speakers are Barack Obama and Dr. Daniel
Griffin. All right, he has a question about his grandfather's immunization status in February.
He got mRNA vaccine four days later tested positive for COVID. Thanks to your advocacy. I got
him monoclonal therapy infection passed. My grandfather had only mild disease following CDC
recommendation. He waited three months before getting the second dose of the mRNA vaccine. Last
time we checked CDC recommendation for someone in the same circumstances does not need to restart
the vaccine schedule. However, we're a little concerned that perhaps his first dose did not
prime his immune system as well. What are your thoughts? We'd like to think he's well immunized
after natural infection and at least one good dose of mRNA vaccine, but we're not completely
confident. Yeah, so this is a great question. I suspect we're in a good situation here, right?
There was a period of time at least where the immune system was learning from that first infection
before the monoclonals jumped in there. That is the current recommendation. There's a science
and there's an equity side to this, right, where should we be giving third doses to people when
so much of the world hasn't even had their first dose? So a situation like this, you're
probably in good shape. What we have sometimes done is if there's doses that might end up in
the trash because we've had a no show, an individual like this might look at the whole picture and
try to make a decision there relative to that. But no, this is the recommendation we think that
this individual is protected, definitely a lot better protected than someone who has had no
vaccination. Frank writes, why do you not mention the use of daily rapid tests at school as a high
quality method eliminating COVID without restricting socialization? A dollar per student per day is
not a burden. If the answer is waiting for FDA approval and high volume manufacturing, we need
to know that and put more pressure on representatives. No, so, and actually when I've talked about
schools in camps, rapid testing, actually testing can be a really important part of your multi-layered
approach to keeping the kids safe. One of the things I will throw out, I think this is important
as a thought experiment, right? Let's say you've got all these layers of protection, you want it,
you're looking to try to get those masks off, right? So those kids can be in person in school with
masks off. Let's say you have a breakdown and in that class of 25 individuals, you miss, right?
Because the sensitivity of the test, someone comes in on a Monday, it's negative, you test
Tuesday, they're positive, you realize, okay, if everyone's wearing masks, you may not have had
an exposure event, you may have actually been able to avoid that, you may be able to move
forward with only that one person coming out of the school. So you got to sort of balance this
issue, is wearing masks such a burden that you're willing to take the risk of exposure events and
all those implications? Or are you okay wearing masks in certain settings? So should there be a
failure of your layers that you're not pulling everyone out for the quarantine and everything
that sort of follows from that. And Laura from New Mexico writes, as COVID infections continue
to rise, is it advisable for a fully vaccinated person who ends up with an infection to get monoclonal
antibody treatment? I live in a somewhat medically underserved area, keep notes on the recommended
treatment approaches. Should I need to be an advocate for myself or a loved one? My immediate
family and the majority of my regular contacts are fully vaccinated, but I want to be prepared
for the uptick in cases that is starting. Yeah, it is the role of monoclonals is not impacted by
prior vaccination. So if an individual who has risk factors for progressing to severe disease
does test positive, go right ahead with the monoclonals. Remember, the vaccines are great,
but nothing's 100%. We have had a few hundred people, so it's a one in a million chance of dying
if you get COVID. We've also had some people, I hate to say at least there are reports of individuals
who got infected after a vaccine and ended up in the hospital or got long COVID. Go ahead,
get the monoclonals. There's no reason not to, they're sitting on shelves, they're paid for by the
government. So go ahead. And that's COVID-19 clinical update number 72 with Dr. Daniel Griffin.
Thank you, Daniel. Oh, thank you. And everyone be safe.
