This week in virology, the podcast about viruses, the kind that make you sick.
From MicrobeTV, this is Twiv, this week in virology. Episode 787, recorded on July 29, 2021.
I'm Vincent Racken-Yellow, and you're listening to the podcast all about viruses. Joining me
today from New York, Daniel Griffin. Hello, everyone. Well, you got the 787, Daniel.
Okay, in the show notes, right? There's a nice picture of a large aircraft.
Have you ever flown one of those 787s? I don't think so. Actually, no, I haven't. I've been on
some of the bigger air buses, but never the 787s. So I flew one. I only flew one once to
Singapore from San Francisco in December 2019, and it's a very comfortable plane, very nice.
You were one of those private little suites, right? I was back in the
coach, but it's an 18-hour flight, so it was a bit rough.
Wow. Yeah, that's a long flight. A long flight. You take a nap and you wake up,
and you say, I must be there, and you got another 16 hours to go. Are you wearing a mask, Daniel?
At the moment, no, but when I, you know, I never stopped wearing masks when I went to the gym,
or when I went to the grocery store or other places, and we're going to be touching on that.
So let's get going. All right, start off with my quotation. I would rather have questions that
can't be answered than answers that can't be questioned. And that's by Richard Feynman,
so anyone who just listened to Twiv, what, 786? Rich Condit. I give him a little credit to Rich
Condit, who I think is also a fan of Richard Feynman. And actually, you know, on some
aside, sometime I'll tell a side story about the connection with Richard Feynman. But
I think that this is what science is about. Science is about asking questions, trying to get
answered. There shouldn't be dogma. People shouldn't be afraid to ask questions, to try to discover
things. Actually, just talking to Dixon de Pomeier earlier today, and I sang a little bit of a rise
in the hate mail I've been receiving recently. I did an article in the Washington Post where I,
you know, bemoan that we didn't have better therapies. And of course, I got lots of emails
about what are you talking about, Dr. Griffin, you know, and then all the less than pleasant
adjectives, crimes against humanity, other things in all caps about, you know, if only everyone in
the world had access to Ivermectin and HCQ, we would all be fine. So we'll touch and don't worry,
I'll make sure I mention Ivermectin, you know, won't let an episode go by without that. But
what is the big thing that happened this week? The CDC updated their guidance,
and boy, did this really get a lot of people confused, angry. So let's spend a little time
going through that. What exactly did they say? What did they post? And then we'll speculate or
discuss a little bit on what is behind this. So I actually thought this was pretty reasonable
on the surface. I feel like this should have been something that came out before they dropped
the mass mandate just to give a little context about like public health, because that's really
what this is. And what the CDC said posted until vaccination coverage is high and community transmission
is low, public health practitioners, as well as schools, businesses, institutions, organizations
need to regularly assess the need for preventive strategies to avoid stress and stressing health
care capacity, and imperiling adequate care for both COVID-19 and other non-COVID-19
conditions. Right, I mean, that's just sort of reasonable. And then the CDC recommended five
critical factors that should inform local decision making. One, you should keep an eye on the level
of SARS-CoV-2 community transmission. Two, you should keep an eye on your health system capacity.
Three, you need to keep an eye on COVID-19 vaccination coverage. Four, look at capacity
for early detection of increases in COVID-19 cases. And number five, you need to be aware of
which populations are at increased risk for severe outcomes from COVID-19. And I really,
I'm going to sort of, you know, little criticism to the CDC. It would have been nice to have this
out front when they said a little while back that they felt like things were at a level where it was
appropriate to get the masks off. But here's what the CDC went on to say. And this is when
people got upset. Among strategies to prevent COVID-19, CDC recommends all unvaccinated persons
wear masks in public indoor settings. Okay, so far, so good. Based on emerging evidence on the
Delta variant, the CDC also recommends that fully vaccinated persons wear masks in public indoor
settings in areas of substantial or high transmission. Fully vaccinated persons might consider wearing
a mask in public indoor settings regardless of transmission level. Or if they or someone in their
household is immunocompromised, or is it increased risk for severe disease, or if someone in their
household is unvaccinated, including children aged less than 12. Vincent, do you have any thoughts?
So yes, I do. They shouldn't have relaxed the masking back in April, because vaccine coverage
was less than it is now. So I don't see why they have to go back. However, what is it? What
does the Delta variant have to do? Any different from any other variant? I don't see the vaccines
prevent severe diseases you have said with any variant. So why this concern about the Delta
variant? Do they have some data which drives that decision? Yeah, some special super double
secret information. Do you remember back in December when you and I talked about how everyone in the
UK and in December, Boris Johnson decided that we could take December off from the pandemic and
everyone could go to the pubs and the taverns and have a good old time. And then suddenly,
the Alpha variant came along and changed everything. Yeah, I think the variants are becoming a bit
of a scapegoat. You know, we saw a huge surge after July 4th. We saw a lot of people indoors
transmitting. And I think there's a couple things in here that we've talked about, but maybe we
need to reinforce. One is that unvaccinated people can get infected and transmit to others. I think
we all know that the other is vaccinated people can get infected and transmit to others, particularly
symptomatic vaccinated people. And I think we have growing data that the farther we get out from those
jabs, the higher the risk is for people to get mild symptomatic case of COVID-19 despite vaccination
and spread it to others. So I am not sure that throwing the Delta variant in here really tells
us very much. And there is this sort of buzz that there's some PCR data out there, you know, about PCR
levels being similar, RNA amplification levels being similar. And we're going to talk about that
when we get to testing. But I think Vincent and I, you were on this, you and I are on the same page.
You know, what is more significant behavior or a few substitutions in the spike protein?
I think it's behavior. And yeah, dropping the mass mandate was a little bit premature.
But we've got to sort of reinforce that, you know, as my mom was saying about a bulletproof vest,
I don't understand how you think that's going to protect you when your head is sticking out.
So children, COVID and mental health, right? So where there's a lot of concern, right, about
vaccinations and the fact that some of our children are not going to be eligible when the school's
open. And there is significant concern about, you know, what we can do to make those schools
safer. So I'm going to start off by discussing an MMWR, so Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report,
an early release came out. SARS-CoV-2 infections in public school district employees following a
district-wide vaccination program, Philadelphia County, Pennsylvania, March 21 through April 23,
2021. And this is this concept that if the school employees, if teachers are all vaccinated,
does this create a safer environment for the children? You know, will this prevent those
employees' staff from becoming infected, potentially spreading it to the children?
So this addressed that question of whether promoting vaccination among school staff members
could potentially make our schools safer. So the school district of Philadelphia reopened for
in-school instruction the week of March 21, 2021, right? So this is a number of months back,
so we're going to see data from the spring. They required weekly testing for SARS-CoV-2,
the virus that causes COVID-19, for all employees returning to in-school responsibilities.
The resumption of in-school instruction followed a mass vaccination program
using the Pfizer-BioNTech 2-dose mRNA vaccine offered under a partnership between the Philadelphia
Department of Public Health and Children's Hospital of Philadelphia CHOP, to all the 22,808 school
district of Philadelphia employees. Now, the mandatory, this was a mandatory testing program,
provided an opportunity to assess the percentage of positive by-necks now, point-of-care antigen
tests identified among school staff members based upon their self-reported vaccination status.
So we're going to be able to see vaccinated, non-vaccinated, and what happened as far as
positive tests. So they found a 95% reduction in the percentage of positive SARS-CoV-2 test results
among persons who had reported receipt of two doses of the vaccine compared with those who had not
been vaccinated. So they concluded that vaccination of school staff members is an important,
potential, important strategy to maximize the safety of indoor person education of K through 12
students this fall. So I have to say, this is actually pretty interesting, right? This is not
looking at protection against hospitalization or severe disease. This is looking at the vaccine's
ability to prevent people from even testing positive. I'm looking at Vincent, to see if he has a
comment. I think it's kind of contradictory to what we've been hearing lately, right? Out of Israel,
people are getting infected after vaccination. So I think my view is that the further you get
out from the second dose, your antibodies level drop, you're more likely to get infected. This
was probably done early on, and that's why the infection was prevented. But it's a good indicator
that they could vaccinate everybody in schools, right? Yeah, no. And I actually think that's
important. I mean, this is the nice thing I think about the TWIV audience is our TWIV audience.
We are educating up there. We're good with nuance here in this TWIV world. This was, as you point
out, Vincent, this was done right after vaccination. This is people with the really high antibody
levels, mucosal surfaces. This is that window, we'll talk about how long that window is in a
science paper later, where that vaccine not only protects you against severe disease but is giving
you this herd immunity impact, actually blocking infection and transmission. All right, so let's go,
you know, kids, it's something I was just reading today. I read the Texas papers. I don't know if
you read the Houston papers there, the Houston press. But in the Houston press, maybe Rich Condit,
I don't know, he's down there in Austin, maybe Houston is, you know, close enough. But this was
in the Houston press, out of all the kids who show up to Texas children's concern that they may have
COVID, roughly 10% of the children who tested positive required hospitalizations, and roughly
a third of those ended up requiring critical care. Now, this is concerning on the surface,
but what exactly does it mean? I want to make a couple comments. You know, when it does point
out that children can get sick with COVID, children can end up in the hospital. But this is a select
population, right? These are children who are symptomatic. When a child's brought to the hospital,
there's usually an impression by the parent or the provider that this is a child with a more
serious manifestation. Historically, those numbers have been down around 1% or less.
And so we'll just we'll keep an eye on this. I think I would be shocked and frightened and
bewildered if really 10% of children end up requiring hospitalization with COVID. I did not think
SARS-CoV-2 has changed its biology enough to affect that, but we will see. But it is important
to realize that kids can get COVID, kids can end up in the hospital, kids can end up on ventilators,
kids can have adverse impacts. Testing, just sort of a brief reminder or primer,
because we're going to be hearing now about CT values. And I think that's great. The conversation
is getting a little more sophisticated, but you don't want to have just a little bit of knowledge
or enough knowledge to make you dangerous. So let's talk a little bit about the really two
large category of tests that we use. We use PCR or molecular amplification tests.
These amplify RNA and give us RNA copy numbers when we look at that CT value or
cycle threshold. This is a test for RNA. It's not actually a viral load. It does not give us
number of infectious variants. And I think that's really critical, because we're going to talk a
little bit later on, perhaps, about does an RNA copy number in a vaccinated person mean the same
thing as an RNA copy number in a person who is unvaccinated, who is not potentially destroying
or neutralizing those variants. The other test that we use quite often, and hopefully more and more,
is the antigen test that by next now that we talked about, a couple other ones that BD
Veratore, Quidel, Sophia, the antigen tests are not looking for RNA. They are looking for proteins,
and particularly the immunodominant protein, the nucleocapsid proteins. So this requires,
these tests require that that protein is produced and present in sufficient quantities.
Now, we know at the front end of infection, we start to see those antigen tests turn positive
in an unvaccinated person when the RNA copy number gets above 50,000. And then the same sort of number
as it drops off the tail several days later. But remember, those, that information, and we're
going to hit some studies here, come from the unvaccinated viral kinetics. So antigen tests
historically have correlated very well with individuals being infectious. Active vaccination
never missed an opportunity to vaccinate, and vaccination is how this pandemic ends.
So I don't know if people remember or know the Harry Met Sally movie, I don't know Vincent if
that's a favorite of yours. Not a favorite, but I've heard of it. Okay, well, I will recommend
rewatching it. You know, we all need a little break. But this is a movie with Billy Crystal and
Meg Ryan. And there's this restaurant scene where Sally, played by Meg Ryan, is ordering,
and she says to the waiter, waiter, I'll begin with the house salad, but I don't want the regular
dressing. I'll have the balsamic vinegar and oil, but on the side, and then the salmon with
the mustard sauce, but I want the mustard sauce on the side. And I remember as a child thinking,
can you do that? Don't you just take what's on the menu? And I feel like we're seeing with the
COVID vaccines a bit a little bit of what I'll call the Harry Met Sally phenomenon. We have these
well studied vaccines, dosing regimens, but people want to order something not on the well
studied menu. Like maybe I'll just take one of those mRNA vaccine doses. And maybe I want to
sort of change the interval of what's being done or what's being recommended. So we just had this
article, original article, effectiveness of COVID-19 vaccines against the B1617.2 Delta variant. So
you get the different nomenclature there in the New England Journal of Medicine. And the authors
used a case control design to estimate the effectiveness of vaccination against symptomatic
disease caused by the Delta variant, comparing this to the alpha variant over the period that the
Delta variant began circulating. So variants were identified with sequencing of the of the S or
the spike gene data on all symptomatic sequence cases in England were used to estimate the proportion
of cases with either variant according to the patient's vaccination status. They found that the
effectiveness of just that one dose was notably lower among persons with the Delta variant,
only 30.7 percent with the alpha variant, 48.7 percent. They report the results were pretty
similar for both vaccines after just that first dose. Now, when you went to two doses of the mRNA,
Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine, 93.7 percent with the alpha variant, 88 percent with the Delta variant.
Now, the the Chadox, the AstraZeneca vaccine, the effectiveness of two doses was 74.5 with the
alpha variant, 67 percent with the Delta variant. So I just want to point out, because I know there's
a lot of discussion now about maybe we should wait, maybe we should change the interval for that
second vaccine dose. And I just want to point out that after just that first dose, you're looking at
only about a 30 percent protection against the Delta variant, which is what is circulating. So
do you want to sit around there at 30.7 percent protection, hoping that if you wait a few extra
weeks, you're going to somehow tweak that 88 percent second dose impact a little higher. So
I'm going to say, don't be sally, just go ahead and get that second dose when recommended.
Now, we also have, we still keep having questions about the third dose, the booster dose.
So we had another paper, and this was antibody response after a third dose of the mRNA 1273 SARS
COV-2 vaccine in kidney transplant recipients with minimal serological response to two doses
published in JAMA. So that's the Moderna vaccine, the Moderna mRNA vaccine that we're talking about.
And the findings were very similar to other investigations we've discussed with
low responders getting some increase in antibody responses with a third dose,
and about 49 percent of kidney transplant recipients who did not respond having detectable
antibody levels after two doses did after a third dose in the case of the Moderna mRNA
vaccine. And I will point out they did not assess the T cell responses. Now this ties into what's
happening to these people, are they getting sick? What is sort of the story? So in the journal
Kidney International, unfortunately behind a paywall, the article occurrence of severe COVID-19
in vaccinated transplant patients was published. And here the authors described 55 solid organ
transplant recipients, 52 kidney, three simultaneous kidney pancreas, who went on to develop COVID-19
after receiving two doses of mRNA-based vaccines. So of these 55 patients,
27 percent required hospitalization for oxygen therapy. It's a little bit higher than we would
think in our generalized unvaccinated population, right? Of these six were admitted to the ICU three
ended up dying. They had information on 25 patients with available data on the anti-SARS-CoV-2 antibodies
between the second dose and the onset of the COVID-19 symptoms. 24, so about half, had negative
serology. One was positive but had weak antibodies. So just a little bit of information we're getting
here trying to figure out what to do with this with this group. I will just say, currently,
we have not started to recommend booster or third doses. But just we are studying this,
we're trying to get a sense of what might happen in the future. I'm going to call this next paper
the optimistic one. I think we need a little optimistic paper here. The paper protection afforded
by the BNT-162B2 and mRNA-1273 COVID-19 vaccines in fully vaccinated cohorts with and without prior
infection. This was posted as a preprint, right? So we get a lot of questions about this. The
authors assessed the effect of prior infection in Qatar, QATAR, where the alpha and beta variants
were dominant during this period of time. And they used two national retrospective matched cohort
studies, one for the Pfizer biotech vaccine, one for the Moderna mRNA vaccine. They reported that
the incident rates of infection among the Pfizer vaccinated persons with and without prior infection
were respectively 1.6 or 11 for 10,000 person weeks. They looked at this in people with the
Moderna vaccine, 1.5 versus 1.83 per 10,000 person weeks. So they actually found that prior
infection enhanced protection of those that received the Pfizer vaccinated, but they really
didn't see a difference here with the Moderna vaccine. It actually saw pretty low rates with
Moderna vaccinated individuals, whether or not they had pre-existing infection. So sort of interesting.
Now, hot off the press, Amy just sent me this. And so I sent her back and said, hey, this is
already on the block to discuss. And this was an article in the journal Science,
Immune Correlates of Protection by mRNA 1273 vaccine against SARS-CoV-2 in non-human primates,
right? So this is the Moderna mRNA vaccine. And I liked it, but I just want to change the title.
If we change the title, I think we're all really good here. This is really immune
correlates of decreased viral replication. And the authors even have a section heading entitled
antibody responses correlate with protection against SARS-CoV-2 replication. And the authors
do demonstrate that the levels of the anti-S antibody and neutralizing activity correlate
with reduction in viral replication in Bronco alveolar lavages. So that's when you put a tube down,
you put in saline, you wash it out, you pull it back out, and nasal swabs following SARS-CoV-2
challenge in vaccinated animals. There's a lot in this paper, but they do also go on to show,
I think this is interesting, that lower antibody levels were needed for reduction of viral replication
down in the lower airways compared to the upper airways. They also report a dose-dependent response.
And this actually correlated with the S-specific T follicular helper cells that activate the B cells
to secrete IgG, and the canonical cytokine IL-2 was also correlated with dose. So I think this
sort of goes with the discussion, Vincent, that you and I were having earlier, that high antibody
levels may have some impact on the ability of the virus to replicate in our airways, particularly
the upper airways. But this is not really a correlate of protection, it's a correlate of
reduction in SARS-CoV-2 replication. It's not a real world thing. We want to know in people
what protects you against severe disease, right? And this doesn't tell us that, unfortunately.
Yeah, I mean, I think it is, and I'll say, it would be great if we had vaccines that had high
degrees of sterilizing immunity. If once you were vaccinated, you could not be infected,
you could not transmit, you would be a dead end if you were exposed. I think that was actually
discussed on 786-12, that we're not even sure how many of those vaccines really are out there,
whether or not the HPV or the measles even do that. But yeah, this is going to be a challenge
if we're looking for, quote-unquote, herd or community immunity, how much can the vaccines
really play a part in that unless you're getting vaccinated every three months or something along
those lines. The period of detectable viral replication, what I like to say is the time for
monitoring and monoclonals, not the time for antibiotics. Remember, this is a virus. We have
anti-virals. No, not so many great choices here in the COVID world. We have anti-bacterial
cells that target bacteria. We have anti-parasitic drugs that target parasites. This is a virus.
So, do we think that antibiotics, anti-bacterial agents will work? Well, a lot of physicians
seem to feel that, a lot of patients feel that, but we have to have another paper that tells us,
yes, water is wet, fire is hot, and this was the Lancet respiratory medicine publication
Doxycycline for community treatment of suspected COVID-19 in people at high risk of adverse outcomes
in the UK. This is the principal study, a randomized controlled open label adaptive
platform trial. So, the background here is that Doxycycline is often used for treating COVID-19
respiratory symptoms in the community, despite an absence of evidence from clinical trials to
support the issues. And there's a lot of hand waving about it interfering with the virus and
in vitro assays and having anti-inflammatory immune modulating effects, et cetera.
So, this data comes from this trial, the principal, and was performed in primary care
centers in the UK. 2,689 participants were enrolled and randomized. And the authors found
that in patients with suspected COVID-19 in the community in the UK, who were at high risk of
adverse outcomes, treatment with Doxycycline was not associated with any clinically meaningful
reductions in time to recovery, hospital admissions, or deaths related to COVID-19,
and should not be used in the routine treatment for COVID-19. The whole comment that there were
780 folks in the Doxycycline group, 978 in the control group. There were five deaths in the
Doxycycline group, only two in control. So, that's like more than double. I do not think
that Doxycycline is something we should be using for COVID-19. The science does not support it.
What do we end up with? An unnecessary intervention and an increase in antibiotic resistance.
The early inflammatory phase, this is when they show up in the hospital,
still not much new here. We're still steroids, tosyllizumab, if they progress to our higher
oxygen need, prophylactic dose anticoagulation in general, adjusted to higher dose in specific
situations. We are still waiting for more therapies, both in the early viral phase as well as this
phase. We're hearing it may not be until October and November before we get small molecule inhibitors
specifically targeting SARS-CoV-2. So, we're still in July, so we still have a little bit more time
to go. All right, and to the end, the tail phase, the long COVID or the post-cute COVID phase.
Lately, we've been hearing a lot about the neurological impacts about acute COVID.
Now, there was an article, The Lancet, Child and Adolescent Health. The peer-reviewed article
appeared in this journal. Neurological manifestations of SARS-CoV-2, infection in hospitalized children
adolescents in the UK, a prospective national cohort study, and the authors performed a prospective
national cohort study in the UK looking at children adolescents, age less than 18, admitted to hospital
with neurological or psychiatric disorders in whom they considered SARS-CoV-2 infection to be
relevant to the presentation. They identified 1334 children and adolescents hospitalized with
COVID-19 and reported a prevalence of 3.8%. Neurological psychiatric disorders following
hospitalization for COVID-19. So, 3.8% of these adolescents and children that have been hospitalized
for COVID-19 went on to have neurological or psychiatric disorders. So, that's about 1 in 25.
The diagnosis included seizures, encephalitis, that's inflammation of the brain,
Guillain-Barre, acute demyelinating syndromes, Korea, which is these uncontrolled movements,
psychosis, psychosis, encephalopathy, transient ischemic attack, even one child had a stroke.
So, you can just imagine how devastating. So, again, I try to give people a balance here between
the risks of COVID in children, should they require hospitalization versus the risks associated
with vaccination. So, I think this helps to give us more information around the decision making
with regard to vaccination and mitigation strategies for children. We're still working to get solid
numbers, but the risk for children, death is rare, hundreds of children have died of COVID here in
the US. Hospitalization is uncommon. Thousands have ended up in the hospital. I think in the UK,
they already have over 1,000 hospitalizations in just July, and long COVID seems to be a
significant risk. Now, this last article, this could be the last article we hit on.
This was in the New England Journal of Medicine, COVID-19 breakthrough infections in vaccinated
healthcare workers. Now, the B word is in the title, so I couldn't leave that out.
The authors reported on infections in vaccinated healthcare workers, and they looked at 1,497
fully vaccinated healthcare workers for whom RTPCR data was available. 39 SARS-CoV-2 infections
was documented in this 1,497 person cohort. They calculate an infection rate of 0.4%,
less than half a percent. There were a few interesting findings. They reported of
these individuals, 74% of the case patients had a high RNA level. I'm translating here because
they call it viral load, but I'm going to say this is a CT value. This is an RNA copy number,
74% of the individuals had a CT value of less than 30 at some point during their infection.
However, of these patients, 59, only 59% had a positive, concordant, antigen,
rapid detection test. I think this is kind of interesting, and I just want our listeners to
think a little bit about what does a CT value mean. We know the relationship between CT values
or RNA copy numbers and infectiousness in unvaccinated people, but what does this mean
in vaccinated individuals? They also reported that neutralizing antibody titers in case patients
during the peri infection period were lower than those in matched, uninfected controls.
Not clear if that's a marker for people with other risk issues or if that's actually a causal
connection. There is a figure three where that correlation, if you look at the figure, it's
not really that impressed, but I will leave it up to our readers to go ahead and take a look.
This is not behind a paywall. They did report that most of the breakthrough cases were mild or
asymptomatic, but here was a bit of why is this in the long COVID section of the people that had
symptomatic infections post-vaccination? And remember, this was a small amount. This was less than 1%,
19% of those people that did have a symptomatic case went on to have persistent symptoms for
greater than six weeks. So I'm sort of put this in context. Getting a symptomatic infection post
vaccine is very uncommon, but it does happen, but should you get that, it actually looks like a
pretty similar rate of long COVID in these individuals. So pretty on par with unvaccinated.
What's going on the rest of the world? I think this is important for us to keep an eye on that.
We continue to see rising case rates and deaths with much of the world still being a vaccine
desert. I like to say no one is safe until everyone is safe and we are far from that at this point.
Whether it's to protect ourselves or through altruism, this pandemic does not end until we
have widespread access and acceptance of vaccines. So I want to thank everyone who's
continuing to go to parasites without borders.com clicking on the donate button. This is going to
drop the last day of July. We're trying to make that $20,000 donation level so that we can give a
full $40,000 to support Foundation International Medical Relief of Children. They've actually
started to open up some of their travels to some of their sites. So brighter, brighter days on the
on the horizon, but this work is going to require funding and support. So please help us support
femric. Daniel, that last paper is of consequence to the CDC decision on masking, which is based on
this PCR equivalence between Delta vaccinated and Delta unvaccinated would suggest that that's
flawed, right? In their case. Yeah, I think that that's really a problem. One is it looks like the
people who are vaccinated are very like less than 1% risk of even testing positive. And then if they
do test positive, you can't just use CT values because you're looking at RNA. It's not viral load.
And I sort of hope that the CDC isn't making that. Can we call it a rookie mistake? You need to
ask. And I think the fact that we're not picking up antigen that we're not seeing the protein
production does really suggest that maybe that RNA level is not correlating with infectious
virus. Yep. And we need a little more data.
Yep. The other thing, Daniel, I wasn't a call yesterday from Mumbai. And one of the women on the
call said they have immunized 450 million people in India.
Wow. That is impressive. Now, compared to the US, that's very impressive.
We'd be done if we had done that in the US. They, but it's not even half of their population,
right? But she said, in India, we don't have a problem with people getting vaccinated.
Interesting. I mean, I think I shared, and this is one of this week in paracetism,
where I was talking about Ben Lebrot. We were in one of these little communities,
and we were talking to one of the women, no-bay woman, about the fact that in the United States,
we actually have people that do not want to vaccinate their children. And she looked at
us a little confused, and she said, but don't your parents love their children in America?
Yeah. Indeed, indeed. Okay, time for some email questions for Daniel. You can send yours to
Daniel at microbe.tv. The first is from Alan, a gastroenterologist in New York.
If a fully vaccinated patient who was in a high risk group age over 65 or medical comorbidities
developed an early COVID infection, would you recommend monoclonal antibody with the level of
the patient's COVID antibody obtained at the time of infection, make a difference in deciding the
treatment? I realize there may not be any randomized trials for this type of situation. However,
clinicians frequently have to make decisions in the absence of good data or good studies.
This is an excellent question, and I'm going to break it down into two parts.
So let's say this is a person who's been vaccinated. They've not been infected with COVID before.
They're in that first week, and I'm going to throw the person who's been infected before
also vaccinated in that first week. We do recommend monoclonal antibody therapy in those
individuals. Your prior vaccination status does not impact your eligibility or our recommendation
for monoclonal antibody therapy. Now, I will say, have we repeated the studies with vaccinated
people to see if we're still getting that 70 to 80% reduction in progression? We have not,
but we're not excluding people who are vaccinated. The other little twist, so let's say you're not
sure about the timing, and this person has not been infected with SARS-CoV-2 before,
you can check a nuclear capsid antibody test to see, are you really catching them early
before they start producing their own antibodies? Because that really is what we've seen as far as
the benefit of monoclonals. If you can give people the monoclonals prior to them developing
their own antibodies, those are the patients that we see the most benefit. And I just
recently had a case where it was really unclear to me. A person was cognitively not 100%.
Sounded to me like we were only two or three days in. We did a stat nuclear capsid antibody.
It was negative, and I went ahead and recommended monoclonals. But no, we have not repeated these
monoclonal studies in vaccinated people. But if they've broken through, gotten a symptomatic case,
I think it makes sense not only to reduce the hospitalization and death rate,
and we're working on data because maybe it's also going to impact their risk of long COVID.
Linda writes, I wanted to understand the role of at-home,
rapid antigen tests for the vaccinated person following exposure to a COVID positive vaccinated
individual. Currently, as I understand New York rules, no quarantine or testing is required for
the vaccinated person that's been exposed. I find that a tad concerning and wanted to protect my
family, no one in a high risk category, and friends following such an exposure, and so have been
wearing a mask at home and limiting my exposures to others for what will be seven days, timing of
my choice based on my own review of the current debates. I'm not sure what the magic number of
days should be, particularly as I go on this frolic of my own, since no one is telling me I
have to do anything other than wear mask indoors. I feel like there's a role for the at-home
antigen test in this setting and consider doing it at days three, then six. I just really don't
know what the reasonable approach is following close exposure to a COVID positive vaccinated
individual. Can you explain if the at-home antigen test plays a useful role in this context?
Yeah, so this is a fantastic question. We have great listeners, or maybe Vincent just picks
out the really great listener questions, but so we'll give everyone credit here. But we do know
that a vaccinated person can develop a symptomatic case of COVID-19 and can transmit to others,
right? Not only is that well-described, but I've seen several cases myself. Can any
asymptomatic vaccinated person get enough virus that they're going to transmit to someone else?
A bit of uncertainty there. We could use some better data. The last study we talked about
were these individuals who are fully vaccinated got infection. We're talking about 0.2% actually
had a positive antigen test. We're in sort of, we need a little more information here.
If it turns out that vaccinated people only transmit, this is sort of case control and tracking
studies. If they only transmit with symptoms, that's helpful. But I think if you're trying to be on
the side of extra caution, you are vaccinated, you've had an exposure, you may be pre-symptomatic,
right? Because you can't get symptomatic. I think that the antigen test is a reasonable
extra layer. So remember, always looking at layers, looking at people's different risk tolerances,
and I think it can factor into that. Gabriel writes, a friend of mine suffers from
Bruton's agamoglobulinemia, and many medical doctors in Ecuador do not recommend any COVID
vaccine for him. I'm a microbiologist. I've carried out research and immunology, and though I understand
that he can't produce antibodies, the T cell responses should be fine. I don't see any risks
of getting vaccinated. I would appreciate your opinion about whether he should receive vaccine,
what kind of vaccine would be better. So I definitely would encourage vaccination. I think we've tried
to reinforce several times that there's more than one arm of the immune system. I'd say two,
that's a little simplistic, but there's the B cell antibody production. We're not going to get
that with Bruton's agamoglobulinemia, but we should be able to get a protective T cell response.
And our data, our understanding of immunology suggests that it's that T cell response that
is really critical in protection against severe disease, hospitalization, and death. So I definitely
would encourage vaccination. I would say whatever vaccine you can get access to, I would go ahead.
Don't be picky. Don't be sally. And the last is from Abby, which is really a comment, but we
should read the Peds New York here. My daughter was 17 in early March 2020 when I brought COVID
home from the Peds clinic. She had mild illness was a fit rugby player still having GI issues,
neurological symptoms, tachycardia, fatigue, brain fog, depression, couldn't eat lost 20 pounds.
We need more parents to learn about long COVID. Many docs are saying it's mild in kids and they
are just as at fault, not vaccinating their own kids. Millions of kids with this around the world.
Yeah, you know, Vincent, we keep seeing these sort of scoreboards, dashboards,
you know, Hopkins world demeanor, and they have number of cases, they have hospitalizations,
they have deaths. What they are missing is long COVID. And I think that that's a critical number
as well. So when we see pretty soon, over 100,000 cases a day here in the US, welcome to
August, I'm predicting, you know, what percent of those individuals are going to continue to be
ill. And I think that's really an important thing. And so when you look at kids and you say,
oh, kids, well, we can see the deaths, we can see the hospitalizations, but what about the long
term, you know, greater than four weeks, greater than 12 weeks of long COVID. And I think stories
like this parent parents need to hear because parents are not necessarily swayed by scientific
studies, they're swayed by stories, by people sharing these experiences. So as I sort of brought
out last time having conversations about vaccines, you know, if your child has suffered, let's
share these stories because we do not need even one more child suffering with long COVID.
That's COVID-19 clinical update number 73 with Dr. Daniel Griffin. Thank you, Daniel.
Oh, thank you. And everyone, be safe.
