This week in virology, the podcast about viruses, the kind that make you sick.
From Microbe TV, this is Twiv, this week in virology, episode 795, recorded on August 19th, 2021.
I'm Vincent Rack and Yellow, and you're listening to the podcast all about viruses. Joining me
today from New York, Daniel Griffin. Hello, everyone. Hey, Daniel, what do you think about
boosters? You going to talk about that today? I'm sure that will come up, but an episode will
not go by without discussing that hot topic. Every week, there's a hot topic, right?
You know, I keep thinking that there's going to be some point in time when it just settles down,
and I have nothing to say, and I look forward to that point in time. We're not there yet.
No, but this is update number 76. Yeah, maybe at update 100, we will reach that point.
Maybe that's optimism. When we get to clinical update 100, we'll see if I was optimistic or not.
All right. All right, well, let's get fired up because we got a lot to do today, and I'll start
with my quotation. There is only one sin, and that is theft. When you tell a lie, you steal
someone's right to the truth. And I don't know if I'm going to pronounce this correctly, but this
is by the author of the kite rudder, Kaleid Hasani. So maybe our writers can let us know if I pronounce
that correctly. Actually, I'm a great fan of this man's work, his books, and this has really been
a tough, really been a tough week, particularly in Afghanistan seeing what's happening there. So
Hart goes out to all those individuals. Now, I'd like to say a single point does not make a line,
so I'm going to keep building on the knowledge we have. But people know that here in the U.S.
things are not going well in a lot of parts of the country, but let's start off with children.
Children may be at low risk, but they are not at no risk, and I've added to this wearing a mask is
less traumatic for a child than being hospitalized. I think we're all aware that there's actually
been some rather odd behavior around this respiratory contagion and children. And we got the article
Association of Age and Pediatric Household Transmission of SARS-CoV-2 Infection published
in JAMA Pediatrics addressing some of the questions around children of various ages and
transmission. And I must say, when I brought up this study, my wife was like, well, I can tell
you what it's going to show. She was right spot on. So this was a cohort study where the authors
looked at 6,280 households that had pediatric index cases and of these, well, about a quarter.
So 1717 households, 27.3% experienced secondary transmission. So just to give you a sense,
this is a household with a child with COVID at about a quarter of them, despite doing whatever
precautions still had secondary transmission. So the authors reported that children aged zero
to three. So they're going to break this down by different age groups. And this could be the
question, who's going to be the highest rate of transmitting? So they're going to use age 14 to
17 as our sort of reference, our adolescents 14 to 17. And then we're going to compare
different age children to those folks. So looking at the zero to three years,
these individuals, the youngest, had the highest odds of transmitting SARS-CoV-2
to household context. Their odds ratio relative to the 14 to 17 was 1.43. And this association
was similarly observed in sensitivity, looking at secondary cases. And so basically going through
the older the kids were, when you got to four to eight, you had a slightly lower, was 1.4,
when you got up to the nine to 13, when you got up to these older. So the highest transmission
was in the youngest individual. So there's been this odd idea that I think our listeners are
probably aware of this odd idea that somehow children can't get COVID and that they can't
transmit, can't transmit the virus. So this is just basically letting us know that, yes,
if children do get infected, they can transmit it in the household context.
Now I'm going to move on to our testing transmission area. And I like to just remind people, I was
in the Brian Lair Show a couple days ago. And there was a whole question about rapid antigen
testing. Are we done with that? And just another study to remind people of how useful rapid
resulting tests can be. And this was the report use of rapid antigen testing for SARS-CoV-2
in remote communities, looking at Yukon, Cuskquim, Delta region, Alaska. And they looked at the
period of time from September 15, 2020 to March 1, 2021. And here, no surprise, the authors reported
that the introduction of rapid point of care antigen testing in this region was followed by
more than a threefold reduction in daily SARS-CoV-2 case rates. And this gets back to something
we've been talking about for well over a year now. And it's that one of the great things about
these point of care antigen tests is you get a result right away. You can quickly remove an
infected person from the transmission cycle, where particularly you look at an area like
remote Alaska to get a return PCR result can actually take a significant amount of time. And
during that time, that individual can continue to transmit the virus. And we still have on our
parasites without borders that calculator, where you can look at different sensitivities, different
approaches. And one of the things I was talking about is a lot of people have started to say,
this is not true, but they do say it, that, oh, these rapid antigen tests, they don't work for the
Delta variant. But remember, the Delta variant has some changes in the spike protein, still plenty
of nucleocapsid being produced. That's the protein we're picking up with these tests.
Are they 100% sensitive? 100% sensitive? No. But are they 80 or 90% sensitive when properly done?
Yes. So, you know, four out of five times, you're catching that person right away in 15 minutes.
If you're still concerned, you can still send off that secondary test. So it makes a lot of sense.
If they're positive, great. You can immediately intervene. If they're negative, and it doesn't
make sense, or you want to have a higher sensitivity, you can always add a PCR on top of rapid testing.
Now, in the MMWR, I'm sure Vince is going to jump in on this one.
Shedding of infectious SARS-CoV-2, despite vaccination when the Delta variant is prevalent,
Wisconsin July 2021 was posted as a preprint. Now, it was told to me, and I didn't actually see
this initially, but this was sort of tweeted my way that initially this was posted with the B-Wirt,
and they updated it because they knew that we would find that B-Wirt offensive,
and they decided to use a much more appropriate term, just infectious cases in vaccinated
individuals. So I have that on unreliable authority. I probably should have asked one of the authors
when I was emailing with him. But in this report, in this preprint using PCR cycle thresholds,
CT data, they actually went ahead and they looked at, can we actually culture
virus from these individuals? And they report that, yes, in the majority of individuals
with CT values less than 25, whether vaccinated or unvaccinated, they were able to actually culture
virus. So they did this in Vero cells. They report in Figure 2 that they were able to see
cytopathic effects after five days of replication in the Vero E6 TMPR SS2 cells.
But we don't get any quantification. And that's really what I was hoping because
the really question is, does this add anything? We know that vaccinated people can get infected.
We know that vaccinated people can transmit. So we already sort of knew going into this that there
had to be replication, competent virus there. The real question is, do those CT values mean
the same thing in a vaccinated and unvaccinated person at one point in time? Because we do know
that that CT value drops more quickly in vaccinated individuals. So I reached out to Dave O'Connor,
who actually was on Twiv 260 with Thomas Friedrich. So I'll call them your colleagues. I don't know
if you guys are friends. And I really wanted to know a couple of things. Hopefully we could
start using the terminology viral RNA load instead of just viral load, because we don't know if this
is virus. We know it's RNA load. But I still really want to know the quantification. So Vincent,
I thought you would have comments on this paper.
I think this is almost criminal to publish, because as you say, they simply take the
nasopharyngeal wash and throw it on cells and culture, and they get infection. There could be
one pfu in the vaccine sample and many more in the unvaccinated sample. So the authors say,
our data substantiate the idea that vaccinated individuals who become infected with Delta may
have the potential to transmit. Actually, it doesn't substantiate it at all. It makes no
conclusions possible. And I'm really surprised that they're trying to publish this. And you know,
the problem, Daniel, is it's a nuance that the mass media is not going to pick up. And that's a
problem. Yeah, I mean, this is the we've entered this different world, right, the world of preprints.
And I did reach out to Dave O'Connor. He emailed me back that they are going to actually are in
the process of looking at the quantification of the cytopathic effects. And that's really what
you need. So this, yeah, by the time it gets published, we'll have that. The only problem in
and I agree with you in the preprint world. And I've been sort of glad the media hasn't jumped too
much on this. This quickly becomes confirmation of this idea that vaccinated people are driving
the pandemic that vaccines are failing. And none of that is true. We are still seeing
vaccines are incredibly effective. And we'll get into that as we discuss
boosters when we get into active vaccination. So all right, I will return to this paper. I hope
when we have some quantification data there, but the sky has not fallen. Well, on the 12th day
of August 2021, the FDA said let there be boosters. And so they went ahead. The US FDA amended the
emergency use authorization for both the Pfizer by and tech COVID-19 vaccine and the Moderna COVID-19
vaccine to allow for an additional dose in certain individuals. Now, what did I like about this
announcement? Well, what I liked Vincent and listeners is that when they did this, they threw
a line in where they said it is recommended that immunocompromised individuals discuss
monoclonal antibody treatment options with their health care provider should they contract or
be exposed to COVID-19. So what do we do have great science that an individual who gets infected,
who is at high risk if they get the monoclonal antibodies that this really is associated with
a reduction in their chance of a bad outcome. But do we know whether or not a third dose of
vaccine will give them benefit? And I'm going to say as we move forward, I'm going to return and
again say that we are still lacking that data. Yeah, we can get some antibody levels a bit higher,
but what does that really translate into? So who are these individuals who are now eligible?
And many of the states have already jumped on. And as of Monday, this has been happening in
several states. The CDC is recommending that moderately to severe immunocompromised people
can receive an additional dose. And this includes, I'm going to give the six categories.
One, been receiving active cancer treatment for tumors or cancers of the blood.
Two, received an organ transplant and are taking medicine to suppress the immune system.
Three, received a stem cell transplant within the last two years, or are taking medicine to
suppress the immune system. Four, moderately or severe primary immunodeficiency. Let me give
some examples, advanced or untreated HIV, or active treatment with high dose corticosteroids,
or other drugs that may suppress your immune system. Now, we do hear that on the 20th of
September, that week, booster is going to be rolled out to the entire population that's eligible
in the US. But if you look at these six categories, this is actually a very small subset. This is
not I'm 65 and overweight. This is not I have multiple medical comorbidities. These are really
severely moderately to severely immunocompromised people that have been added now.
And then again, the suggestion is that the third week of September, this will roll out to a larger
population. And don't worry, I'm going to hit some of the studies that supposedly support this
concept. Lots of vaccine mandates on April. So there was a new vaccine mandate for New York State.
And this came out on, I say April, but it's actually August 16th. I'm going to update that.
All healthcare workers in New York State will be required to be vaccinated by Monday, September 27th.
And this will include staff at hospitals, long-term care facilities, nursing homes, adult care,
and any other congregate care settings. And there will be certain vaccinations limited for
religious and medical reasons. But remember, those medical reasons are incredibly limited.
Basically, it's a person who had an adverse reaction to this vaccine, or one of the components of
this vaccine. It's not I have lupus. It's not I have high blood pressure. It's not I'm allergic
to bees or talcum powder. The medical exceptions are very narrow. So I know there's already a lot
of people running out to see if their family doctor will write them a note. Those notes really
are not going to mean much unless you have had an anaphylactic serious reaction to a component in
these vaccines. What about vaccines and variants? Who's to blame? That's what we like to do as a
society. Along the lines of no one is safe until anyone is safe. There was a preprint that I found
rather interesting. And this was full vaccination suppresses SARS-CoV-2 delta variant mutation
frequency. And it wasn't frequency. So just full vaccination suppresses SARS-CoV-2 delta variant
mutation frequency. Now, the authors analyzed SARS-CoV-2 delta variant sequences from Australia,
France, Germany, Indonesia, India, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Mexico, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal,
Singapore, Spain, Switzerland, Sweden, Turkey, the US and the UK. There was a lot of data. This
all came from the global initiative on sharing all influenza data. So this is the G said G-I-S-A-I-D.
And they had a number of different variant sequences. And they did. I don't know if anyone's
familiar with the Tahima D test. I lit that up. This was new to me. But really, I thought it was
interesting. In Figure 1, they show a mutational frequency on the y-axis. They show the fully
vaccinated rate. Really areas with high mutational frequency had low fully vaccinated rates.
Areas with low mutational frequency had lower fully vaccinated rates. This makes biological
sense. The more you give the virus a chance to replicate, you would expect higher mutational
frequencies. But I don't want people to run out and start yelling at the unvaccinated people
claiming that they are a menace to society based on this one paper. But it is an interesting
report. Vincent's got his hand up. Jump in, Vincent.
Actually, an incorrect interpretation. The mutation frequency is not affected,
because the mutation frequency of the virus is a constant. What is affected is selection
out of that pool of variants of ones with changes, depending on the factors that they
look at in this paper, vaccination in this point. It is not correct that vaccination
suppresses the mutation frequency. It suppresses the number of changes that you see ending up in
spike as a result of selection. Does it make sense? It makes a lot sense, because this is really
not looking at the mutational frequency as far as occurring. It is looking at an end product.
Exactly. I am sorry to keep in trouble. No, I think that is helpful.
Because I have a lot of questions from people. How do the mutation frequency is affected?
No, no, no, no, no. It is not.
I would like to, maybe we could say this is you get to roll the dice less.
Still get against the same number of you. All right. Now, boosters. This is the only reason
Vincent is here today. No, no, no. I am here every week for the same reason.
So this is the special secret data that we were, we were not allowed to know about,
but now it's being shared with us. So there were several, several reports that came out.
So one came out in the MMWR, effectiveness of the Pfizer, BioNTech, and Moderna vaccines
in preventing SARS-CoV-2 infection among nursing home residents before and during widespread
circulation of the SARS-CoV-2 be 1617.2, the Delta variant, National Healthcare Safety Network,
March 1 through August 1, 2021. So this is an MMWR early release. And it's interesting,
I had a discussion with one of my colleagues about what were MMWRs? What were MMWR early releases
before the pandemic? Really, was there many people other than me and my infectious disease
colleagues that looked at these? And now they've become primetime. They're sort of being asked to
be something they weren't before this. And we'll get into that whole idea of asking something to be
something that it was not asked to be before. But in this weekly report, they looked at data
that was reported to CMS Centers for Medicaid and Medicare, certified skilled nursing facilities
or nursing homes. This was the National Healthcare Safety Network and analyzed to evaluate. And
this is interesting, the effectiveness of full vaccination with any of the two currently authorized
mRNA COVID-19 vaccines on effectiveness against infection, right? So this is where we're suddenly
asking vaccines to do something quite different. And so using 17,470, so I'm going to try that again,
17,407 weekly reports from almost 4,000 facilities from the pre-Delta period, adjusted effectiveness
against infection for any mRNA vaccine was reported to be 74.7%. They then followed it up with this
intermediate period where they reported it was 67.5. And then they looked at 85,593 weekly reports
from 14,917 facilities during the period when the Delta variant was becoming prevalent.
And here they reported an adjusted effectiveness against infection of 53%.
And they say this was similar for Pfizer, BioNTech, and Moderna. So the point I want to make,
and I'm Vince and I am sure you will jump in on this. So I'm already prompting you to do that,
is I was asked by someone today, said, I was watching a Fox News report and they're saying,
oh, these vaccines, look at this. If you had a vaccine that was as crummy as this, what would
you do? And I wanted to point out to this gentleman, we are suddenly asking the vaccines to do
something that the vaccines were not necessarily designed to do. We designed these vaccines.
Vaccines traditionally have protected us against disease, against serious disease ending up in
the hospital, dying. Suddenly these vaccines have a new superpower. They are actually protecting
people. They are effective against infection. I mean, this is tremendous and continues to be
tremendous. So I don't walk away with this being being worried. And now maybe we're saying we want
them to do this new superpower even better. And so we're asking if we give a third dose,
can we do even better effectiveness against infection? But this is not failure. This is actually
vaccines with a new superpower being asked to do even more. So Vincent, I don't know if you had a
comment. Well, the problem here is that, as you said, they're looking at infection. And the
infection efficacy declines because serum antibody declines after vaccination or infection. It always
does. It's not surprising. We just for other vaccines, we never really looked at infection.
We just looked at disease. And that's how these vaccines were tested. They do note this analysis
assessed VE against infection without being able to distinguish between asymptomatic and
symptomatic presentations. Additionally, valuations are needed to understand protection
against disease and nursing home residents. That's the key. And I bet it's not declining,
as you're probably going to tell us from some other studies that came out in the same issue.
Yes. So let's hit this a couple others, which I think are reassuring because there were a couple
other releases. So one was new COVID-19 cases and hospitalizations among adults by vaccination
status New York May 3rd through July 25, 2021. And so this is looking at real world effect of this,
the general population here in New York. And these authors link to information from four
large databases to construct a surveillance based cohort of adults age greater than or equal to 18
years residing in New York. And they found that new COVID-19 hospitalizations were 0.17 per 100,000
person days in the fully vaccinated compared with 2.03 per 100,000 person days among the unvaccinated.
And they concluded that the overall age adjusted vaccine effectiveness against hospitalization in
New York had remained relatively stable, 91.9 to 95.3%. I mean, so I have to say, this is what the
vaccines were designed to do. They continue to be highly effective in preventing hospitalization
greater than 90% for fully vaccinated New York residents, even during a period when the prevalence
of the Delta variant increased from less than 2% to greater than 80%. And when so many of the
non-pharmaceutical prevention strategies, the societal public health restrictions were eased.
So getting rid of the mask wearing, cranking those restaurants back up to 100% capacity
and the like. And a hand is up for Vincent Rackeniello.
And the same period when the hospitalization against hospitalization was steady, the VE against
infection went from 90 to 80% of decline. So it just goes to show a decline in preventing infection
doesn't matter. They know how to do it in New York state. Maybe you were involved with this
because it's done right. Now, along these same reassuring lines, I'm going to give you a third.
So hopefully people are going to walk away. Dr. Griffin, you started so for Lauren, but now
you're giving us good news, sustained effectiveness of Pfizer, biotech, and Moderna vaccines against
COVID-19 associated vaccines among adults. And this is United States March through July 2021.
And this is not just in New York, but here the investigators found again, the vaccine
effectiveness was 86%, two to 12 weeks after vaccination, 84% at 13 to 24 weeks. Really,
the vaccine effectiveness was sustained among groups at risk for severe COVID-19. So a second
study looking at a different population continuing to have some really reassuring.
So here's the big question. Where's the science? Why are we giving everyone third doses? Are we
just going to bump anybody levels? Do we really have evidence that this will translate into
real world benefit, keeping people out of hospital, keeping people from dying, keeping people from
getting sick, keeping people from ending up with long COVID? That's data we still need.
So booster or not, Daniel? You know, you know, Midston, I actually had a sleepless night about
this the other day because, you know, it came to me sort of this issue of I say, Oh, Dr. Griffin,
you're eligible for a third shot. Do you want one? And there really is this sort of embarrassing
equity issue, right? I mean, I feel like I'm at the family table, you know, and Uncle John,
you know, just showed up and, you know, and he hasn't gotten a first portion and they want to
know if I want to get, you know, thirds. And I actually, I have to say, I feel a bit embarrassed
about the global vaccination rollout and this whole concept that without, you know, data,
like, well, what benefit are we really getting, particularly when it rolls out of someone I like
to think of myself as young and healthy? Do I really need that third shot? I mean, if it's going
to go in the trash, if they're like, hey, Dr. Griffin, you know, we had a no show and we're not
sure what to do with this. Okay, that's that's a different scenario. But the idea that we're
going to keep buying hundreds of millions of vaccines that we're not going to somehow modify
our bureaucracy and share, you know, we're in a global pandemic. It's time for the bureaucracy to
add and people to be a little more reasonable. So can I ask you, Daniel, though, let's say we
did give a third dose. I presume within eight months, the levels of antibodies are going to
wane again. So are we going to give a dose every eight months? Is that the plan?
That sounds like the current plan. Sounds like where we're headed every eight, you know, maybe we'll
do it every six because who can keep track of every eight? But yeah, I don't understand the,
you know, and I, you know, to bounce back to Afghanistan. What's the end game? What are we doing?
Where are we going with this? Are we going to just keep every six months? And after a while,
you're going to have to start wondering what's the safety, you know, profile of we keep doing this
every every six months, every eight months, you know, with the influenza vaccine, it doesn't even
work well when you have to get everyone back every year for a new shot, right? It's the update is
very low. So I think it's a public health problem. Yeah. And from a public health problem, what is
fueling this pandemic? Not people failing to get a third shot is people failing to get the first
to exactly that. I think we should push to get people vaccinated, not to give those who are
already ever vaccinated a third shot. That's crazy. Oh, well, all right. So the period of
detectable viral replication, the viral symptom phase, right? This is that that first week for
most people. It's when people start to feel crummy. Maybe they had an exposure. What I like to say,
the time for monitoring and monoclonal is not the time for antibiotics. You know,
we've had a lot of enthusiasm about convalescent plasma. And the article early convalescent plasma
for high risk outpatients with COVID-19 was published this week in the New England Journal
of Medicine. This is the siren three CPO study. And there were 511 patients enrolled in the trial,
257 in the convalescent plasma group, 254 in the placebo group. The median age was 54.
The median symptom duration was four days, right? So they're doing it the right way.
The mean titer of SARS-CoV-2 neutralizing antibodies was 1 to 641. So high titer
neutralizing antibodies given early. Disease progression occurred pretty much the same,
about 30% in people in the convalescent plasma group and in the placebo group. Now,
five patients in the convalescent plasma group died, only one in the placebo group.
Now comes regarding worst illness severity, hospital-free days, really similar in the two groups. So
just another study, early administration of high titer convalescent plasma for the treatment of
COVID-19 obtained from blood donors who recovered from the coronavirus disease 2019 was not helpful.
I sort of want to leave that there. I know there's a lot of enthusiasm. We've done a lot of the
science and the science does not support this intervention. Now, I am going to try to keep
this short today. We have a few emails. So I'm going to wrap up here just with really a couple
concluding thoughts. One is, as I continue to say, and we've bounced into this, no one is safe
until everyone is safe. We really need to figure out what's going on with the global vaccination
approach because it is falling flat. We are going to continue during the months of August,
September and October, to support floating doctors. We're hoping to give them a donation up to $40,000
to support their work down in Panama. We were able to get that support out to them, Rick,
and got a nice thank you photo from my friends in Uganda, where there is not a lot of vaccines,
where there is not a discussion of third doses. And so I want to thank all of our listeners for
continuing to support us, continuing to go to parasites without borders to donate, and to help
us with this work. Dan, you mentioned the Afghanistan situation. I assume nobody's getting vaccinated
there at these days, right? It is a problem. It's a problem. Yeah. People are concerned about
getting out, right? Yeah. I mean, it's really a humanitarian disaster we have right now,
and vaccinations are certainly not part of that. Yeah. Time for some email questions for Daniel.
You can send yours to Daniel at microbe.tv. We have one from Pear, who writes,
my daughter is a kidney transplant recipient, has recently been through lymphoma,
and barely has any B cells, thanks to retuximab. She's, however, on intravenous Ig therapy,
and I'm wondering, would that now confer some level of immunity against COVID? I found a few
papers commenting that there are common COVID antibodies in common IVIG, but I haven't been able
to find any information about if they confer any level of real life protection. I guess,
in an ideal world, she would be a recipient of monoclonal antibodies, but unfortunately,
we don't live in the US and they're not available where we live. Yeah. So just to give our listeners
maybe a little bit of background. So the whole concept here is this is an individual who cannot
make their own immunoglobulins or own antibodies. And so the IVIG treatments periodically, you're
giving this individual donated immunoglobulins from other individuals. Now, if those other
individuals perhaps have been vaccinated, and we're starting to see this now, that people who are
donating IVIG have been vaccinated, and in that IVIG are actually some of these protective antibodies
generated by vaccination or maybe prior infection. So that's helpful. I don't think we'll end up
doing like large scale studies, but a lot of the mechanism here just makes sense. The next thing
that would make the most sense is these are individuals who, if they were in the right setting,
could receive monoclonal antibodies. So that's being studied here in the US,
that's an expensive option, but IVIG is not cheap. But yeah, I think you're thinking this
through properly. Gene from London, by the way, discovered Twiv from your appearance on the Brian
Lear podcast, Daniel. So that's great. And she says, I never use the B word or the words viral load,
I distinguish infection from disease. So we're teaching them Daniel, that's great.
But we did make a mistake. And it's actually my fault. And several people have pointed this out.
I'd like to say it's carbon dioxide that we need to measure for indoor air quality
relating to COVID. And I had said carbon monoxide, of course, carbon monoxide would also be a serious
concern for air quality. I've implemented CO2 monitoring in my office as a proxy for
understanding ventilation levels. It's part of our layered mitigations, which include vaccination
masking hand and respiratory hygiene, reminding people to stay home if unwell. So that was my
mistake. Because you had said, what are those monitors? And I said carbon monoxide and a bunch
of people wrote in to say, no, no, no, it's carbon dioxide for that. Yeah, I don't know if you noticed
Vincent from there on out, I just kept referring them as the monitors and not correcting it.
Because you know, it's what you can correct me. It's no problem. Like how many people.
I like what our listeners write in. All right. And the last one is Thomas, who's up in Alberta,
Canada. I would like your thoughts on the anticoagulation issue you spoke about in the last
clinical update where the one arm of the paper in New England Journal for critically ill patients
showed no benefit with therapeutic anticoagulation. But the other arm, which wasn't highlighted in
the update of non critically ill patients, which would be a large proportion of hospitalized patients
did see benefit with therapeutic doses of LMWH. What is the standard of care for non critical
COVID-19 hospitalized patients in your community as it relates to anticoagulation?
Certainly. So the LMWH, that's low molecular weight heparid or anoxaparid is kind of the
common one that we use. You know, there's there's a balance here. If you do nothing,
people who have COVID-19 are at a higher risk of developing clotting complications,
both venous and arterial. And I said on the American Society of Hematology,
guidelines panel where we keep reviewing all the literature here. So I like to think that our
treatment is sort of up with the literature. And the baseline recommendation across across the bat
is anyone with COVID-19 who requires hospitalization and the associated immobility is put on prophylactic
dosing anticoagulation. If you escalate that, okay, maybe you're going to have a reduction in the
amount of clotting complications, but it is looking particularly as this study pointed out in critically
ill patients that you're going to increase your risk of major bleeding. Now what is major bleeding?
And that's tough. Is it a gastrointestinal bleed with about a 20 to 30% risk of death?
Is it an intracranial bleed with the associated neurological impact? Is it a retroperitoneal
bleed that we can transfuse through? So that that's really the balance here. So our standard
is everyone comes in prophylactic dosing anticoagulation, vigilance to make sure that they don't have a
clotting complication. And then sort of a case by case basis considering is there a reason to
escalate in this individual? Daniel, what's on your bow tie today? I can't quite see it.
So today is Clostridium difficile. Wow. So it's a gram negative. This is that antibiotic
associated diarrhea from people using using too many antibiotics. I'm very happy that both
ties represent all microbes. Try to be try to be an equal opportunity bow tie pathogen wearer.
That's COVID-19 clinical update number 76 with Dr. Daniel Griffin. Thank you, Daniel.
Oh, thank you. And everyone, including you Vincent, be safe.
