This week in virology, the podcast about viruses, the kind that make you sick.
From MicrobeTV, this is Twiv. This week in virology, episode 803 recorded on September 9th, 2021.
I'm Vincent Dracken-Yellow, and you're listening to the podcast all about viruses. Joining me
today from New York, Daniel Griffin. Hello, everyone. How's the week been, Daniel?
You know, it's a little truncated. Here in New York, we had a long weekend. I guess, well,
most of the country had a long weekend. It was Labor Day, right? Monday was Labor Day,
and I celebrated Labor Day by not laboring. I'll let other people labor. So it's nice to
have a little. I did a lot of sailing, so that was very nice. Time with the family. All right,
but we got lots to cover of. I keep looking to that point when we have less to cover. We're not
there yet. So let me start with my quotation. Life is a long lesson in humility, and that's by James
M. Barrie. I think Peter Pan maybe was something that he created, so. But it seemed appropriate,
because I think science is clearly an arena where this is very much true. And I think it's fair to
say science is a lifelong lesson in humility. That's why we do science because we don't know the
answers. So science is really, I like to say, a journey of discovery, not a path to confirmation.
If we know all the answers, we would not have to do the experiments or the trials.
This episode is going to drop on 9-11, so I just want to just sort of take a moment there.
You know, I grew up in New York, so that was really sort of a difficult day for a lot of us.
All right, let's get into a number of papers here. The quotation I start with
really is something that has been addressed. I've seen a number of papers recently,
and one of them, actually a couple of them, I think are in open forum infectious diseases.
And the first overlooked shortcomings of observational studies of interventions in
coronavirus disease 2019, an illustrated review for the clinician, right? And so, you know,
these updates, I don't know if our listeners remember, they really started off theoretically
as a clinician update. So I like to keep that focus, but I think we have non-clinicians that
listen, right? But let me just read the abstract here, because over the last two years, this has
been a rapid education, re-education for a lot of clinicians when something gets published.
It gets thrown out there as a pre-print, it gets interpreted in the media,
and a lot of clinicians are trying to decide what to do based, unfortunately, on a lot of
observational studies that may not have been done that well. So let me just read the abstract here.
The rapid spread of severe acute respiratory syndrome, coronavirus, to infection across the globe,
triggered an unprecedented increase in research activities that resulted in an astronomical
publication output of observational studies. However, most studies fail to apply fully the
necessary methodological techniques that systematically deal with different biases and confounding,
which not only limits their scientific merit, but may result in harm through misleading
information. And, you know, I am going to highly recommend that all clinicians take the time to
read this. I think this is really critical. And it's only an eight-page paper. It's not
terrible to read. You know, our goal is discovering what's true as clinicians. You know, when you go
see the clinician, you want them to tell you what's true, not just what they're excited about.
And, unfortunately, as we've seen over the last two years, there's been a lot of poorly
done studies that actually got people excited about stuff that turned out not to make a difference,
right? And they talk in this paper about several of these issues. So one, treatment selection bias.
Maybe we remember that vitamin D study that we all got excited about. And then some savvy people
in Spain realized that they were giving vitamin D to the people in the healthier, less acute wards,
but not giving it to people with severe disease and more issues. And so, yeah, young, healthy people
do better. So was it really the vitamin D? And that was not helpful if anything that was misleading.
Then there's survivor bias, right? You know, you decide you're going to enroll someone in a
treatment. And they have to live long enough to get the treatment. So there's sort of this immortal
period introduced. So it's important that we understand that. And then there's these competing
risks, like if our endpoint is discharged from the hospital, what happens afterwards have we
excluded them, not follow them into discharge. So there's really, I think this is really great.
There is a role for observational studies, but this paper just reinforces how important it is
designing, conducting, and then really, I'm going to say the integrity of publishing
helpful, reliable information. Because if you get something out there, and it supports something
because of one of these biases or poor study design, that's not helpful. It's more than not
helpful. It's actually can be harmful. The other paper that I enjoyed this last week,
got all this extra time, right? So I could read critical review of the scientific evidence and
recommendations in COVID-19 management guidelines. This is really enlightening. I get to see some
of this as I'm involved in the care of patients at multiple health systems, also involved in the
outpatient setting. And I talked to our providers across the tri-state area. Well, I tend to look
to professional societies or government resources like the IDSA, the NIH, American Society Hematology,
or the CDC. This paper gives a good description of the landscape. There are actually hundreds of
different recommendations out there. Only about half of the ones out there really have any assessment
of the supporting evidence. And there's actually quite a bit of discrepancies between different
guidelines. And I actually think this speaks to this vacuum created by a lack of well-designed
randomized controlled trials. It also might speak to an issue with who creates these guidelines,
right? Each hospital health care system physician group out there creating their own treatment
guidelines in this void. I mean, I might, like for instance, there are guidelines for treatment
at Columbia University, or recommended by a professional society. But then I go to a certain
hospital, oh, we don't do that here. So this is a challenge, and I think this is another area.
But I shouldn't complain, right? I have colleagues in rural parts of the American West, and they're
probably listening and saying, Dr. Griffin, you don't need to complain, we have it worse.
And I won't even go into the details. You can just use your imagination, but you can imagine some
of the guidelines in certain areas of the world and our country. All right, let's get right into
children, COVID and mental health. As I've been saying for quite a while, children are at lower
risk, but they are not at no risk. And I think everyone is really waking up to this. Wearing a
mask is less dramatic for a child than being hospitalized. And I'm going to add a new one.
Children should not have to choose between health and education. So I've talked a lot about the
American Academy of Pediatrics, which has a COVID tracking. The CDC also has a data tracking page,
specifically looking at pediatric data. So you can look at this, and it's just it's outstanding.
We're over over a quarter million children were infected with COVID in the last week.
Hospitalizations are going up. Just anyone who is still sort of in this idea that for children,
COVID is not a problem. The heads in the sand, the information is out there. Yes, two years ago,
18 months ago, when our I was give moms the credit, and I think I should in most cases,
when the moms were keeping the kids safe, despite what people were saying, if a kid does not get
exposed to COVID-19, if they don't get infected with COVID-19, it's not a problem. But now children,
enormous number of children, I think we're over 6 million children have been infected with COVID
in this country. So we did get some data from the post MMWR, two really informative publications,
trends in COVID-19 cases, emergency department visits, and hospital admissions among children
and adolescents aged 0 to 17 years. This is United States August 2020 to August 2021.
And so here the CDC analyzed COVID-19 cases, ED visits with a COVID-19 diagnosis, hospital admissions,
and overall COVID-19 ED visits and hospital admissions increased since June 2021 in children
and adolescents. The rate per 100,000 persons of COVID-19 admissions in August 2021 in the
quartile of states with the lowest vaccination rate was almost four times higher than the quartile
with the highest vaccination coverage, right? Think about, most of these kids are not eligible,
so a lot of the impact here we're seeing is adults getting vaccinated and the benefit that
can provide. We also saw second publication hospitalizations associated with COVID-19 among
children and adolescents. COVID-19 states March 1, 2020 to August 14, 2021. Here they reported
that the weekly COVID-19 associated hospitalization rates among children and adolescents rose nearly
five-fold during late June to mid-August 2021. The proportions of hospitalized children and
adolescents with severe disease was similar before. And during this period of Delta predominance,
hospitalization rates were 10 times higher among the unvaccinated than among the fully
adolescent, fully vaccinated adolescents. So that's looking at the vaccine eligible group.
So I think just important information that we have here, it's great that this is being tracked.
This is important when parents are making decisions, when adolescents are involved in
shared decision-making about vaccines. Yeah, I'm not sure why people are so sensitive.
Whenever I talk about children and COVID, I'm just sharing the information. So pre-exposure
period transmission testing never miss an opportunity to test. I just did a keynote talk earlier today
about testing. And usually this is the area where I'm trying to reinforce antigen testing,
talking about PCR detection, talking about how actually antigen tests maybe have been compared
against the wrong gold standard. Maybe if you compare those antigen tests against viral culture,
against contact tracing, against transmission. I think I'm going to say that antigen tests used
during that two days before, three to five days after symptom, during the period of time we see
transmission, even at home antigen tests were in the high 90s. So they are not an issue with lack
of sensitivity during that period. Once a person is past that period stage, once the viral RNA is low
and the viral antigen gets to a very low level, yes, the antigen test will turn negative,
use the right test at the right time to ask the right question. But today I'm going to talk
about serology. We had a couple interesting studies looking at serology. It's going to be
serology positivity. One is the U.S., the other Kenya, both published in JAMA. So the first one
estimated U.S. infection and vaccine-induced SARS-CoV-2 seroprevalence based on blood donations
July 2020 to May 2021. So this is a repeated cross-sectional study that included 1,443,519
blood donation specimens from a catchment area representing 74% of the U.S. population.
They reported that general population increased. This is really what's sort of the money here.
83.3% had a combined infection or vaccine-induced antibodies. It's actually pretty high, I have to
say. The authors looked at both spike and nucleocapsid antibodies, nucleocapsid being associated
with infection, spike being from either. This is a very high number. I think there's a couple
things to point out. People that donate blood are not necessarily representative of everyone.
But there was, I'll say, a little bit of a disturbing feature here. If you looked at this,
the infection-induced seroprevalence was consistently highest in Hispanic,
non-Hispanic Black individuals. The Caucasians are getting their immunity from vaccination.
Other populations are getting it disproportionately from infection.
Now, the second article, so here, most people in this first study are getting their positivity,
their immunity from vaccination. I think we're up to 75% of the U.S. population has gotten the
first dose. 75% of eligible. Remember, we still have a large chunk of our population, the children
that are not eligible. The second article was a situation where there was limited access to
vaccines. And this was prevalence of SARS-CoV-2 antibodies from a national sero surveillance
of Kenyan blood donors, January through March 2021. And in this article, the authors report
about seroprevolence in Kenya. This is a surveillance study looking at blood donors,
aged 16 to 64, slightly different age demographic in Kenya. We don't have as many folks over the
age of 65. The national prevalence of SARS-CoV-2 antibodies was estimated at various points in time,
basically getting to sort of the end, the crude seroprevalence had gotten to as high as 44.2.
And this is actually in line with what we're seeing in a lot of other areas. But remember,
this is dominantly coming from exposure from infection. The Kenya COVID-19 vaccine program
only began in March of 2021. So a little bit, and there were only up to 2% of the population
by July 2021. So most of that is from infection. All right, active vaccination. There's always
news on this front. Never miss an opportunity to vaccinate vaccination is how this pandemic ends.
Wednesday, September 1st, right, Madhiran announced its completed submission for full approval
of its mRNA vaccine. So we're hoping we're going to see that coming up on the horizon.
Why does this matter, right? It actually seems like it does when I talk to my patients. I was
talking to an unvaccinated woman earlier this week. And she was not vaccinated. And she said
she was not interested in getting vaccinated until she heard about this new licensed vaccine called
comarinate. And she's very excited to get comarinate as soon as that is available.
So I think once we have the ability for people to get spike-vax,
I was talking to one of the nurses today and asked, you know, what would you choose the comarinity
or the spike-vax? I choose Spike Lee. Okay. So I think this stuff matters, actually. People seem
to care. And the other thing, right? I mean, I was not going to include, how can you not talk
about boosters? That's all anyone wants to talk about. So what about the data from Israel to
boosters? So this is my plug for Shane Crotty. I listened to the Shane Crotty episode. Shane
Crotty is actually one of the people that I reach out to when I've got an immunology question.
He's brilliant. He's actually an individual, the WHO, and a lot of other people turn to when they
really want to know what the science shows. And if you go to the Twiv episode right before this,
it's great because everyone's asking him questions. And Shane Crotty is so good. He basically
this is what the science says. He doesn't get ahead of the science. You don't get Shane Crotty's
opinion. You get this is what the science is telling us. So if people really want a deep dive,
you know, spend that. I think he's on for about the first hour, but then stay for the rest of the
show. But that that is really great. But what what created all this fuss? And I'm just going to spend
a moment on this. The preprint correlation of SARS-CoV-2 breakthrough infections to time from
vaccine preliminary study was put up as a preprint. Now, a number of statisticians, mathematicians
have got a chance to really look at this. And some of the other data you can bring down from the
Israeli dashboards of public accessible data. And yesterday, I got to listen to a really great
analysis of this data presented by one of my colleagues, Ephraim Castillo. He's one of the
senior VPs at Optum with whom I work. And he really explained all about how this data was not
originally correctly analyzed, explained a bit about Simpson's paradox, where if you don't break
it down and look at the data correctly, it can be concerning. But he went ahead and broke down
the data by a number of narrower age bands. And really looked at, okay, if you look at a place
like Israel, if you look at the population, say 90+, over 90% are vaccinated. Actually,
over 70, if you look at people over the age of 70, really, if you go to people 60 and up,
the majority over 90% are vaccinated, right? These people, you've greatly reduced their risk,
but they're still the high risk of ending. And if you go through each, what is the efficacy we're
seeing for prevention of severe disease, you're seeing in the oldest population an 82-fold reduction
in risk in efficacy versus severe disease of over 90%. And you sort of march all the way down. You
actually get to the youngest individuals under 30, and you're looking at close to 100% in the 30
to 39, 96.8%. So properly analyzed, I continue to not be concerned by this data.
Shane Crotty talked a little bit about, you know, are we concerned about infection?
Is there a potential that that's going to be tied in with transmission potential for long
COVID? We'll have to see. But I think this is just when you look at it correctly, there's no reason
for panic. The booster study, the booster decisions will be addressed, but you don't need to run out.
I get questions every day. Should I run out? If we're going to follow the science, the science
is not pushing us. All right, passive vaccination. I'm almost delighted how much my colleagues have
taken advantage of the prophylactic indication for monoclonals. So let me just reinforce this here.
So a bit back, the Regeneron cocktail, Regeneron Cove, was given an expansion of its EUA for post
exposure prophylaxis. So the US FDA issued an EUA of all these three letter acronyms, TLA's,
to permit the emergency use of Regeneron Cove for post exposure prophylaxis in individuals
who are at high risk for progression to severe COVID-19. And who are these individuals? So one,
not fully vaccinated, or they were vaccinated, but you have doubts about their ability to
mount an adequate immune response, an individual who is on immunosuppressive medications,
or, as they say, at high risk of exposure to an individual infected because of occurrence in a,
let's say, a nursing home or an institutional setting such as a prison. So I've actually added
this as part of my history of present illness. Once I get through with the patient, I say,
all right, this is great. Now we have a plan for what we're going to do for you, but let's talk
about everyone else that you may have exposed who is either exposed and might benefit for
prophylaxis or is already infected and might benefit from early treatment. You know, I have to say
this has really been tremendous in the tri-state area. We are seeing a low number of our pro-health
and our optometri-state folks end up in the hospital because we are doing, I say, a tremendous amount
of getting these individuals in for the monoclonals, keeping them out of the hospital. And a lot of
the health systems have really helped support access, you know, tip my hat again to the Catholic
hospitals, really jumped in and helped us with this. All right, I'm going to jump right to the
early inflammatory phase, right? So we did have an update, an update from the American Society of
Hematology, living guidelines on the use of anticoagulation for thrombo-prophylaxis
in patients with COVID-19. And this was an update on the use of anticoagulation in critically ill
patients. Full disclosure, I'm one of the authors on this. But this was a recommendation
regarding patients in the hospital who are requiring critical care. So these are either patients in
ICU, but it's not geographic. So it's patients who require that level of support, really in favor
of prophylactic intensity anticoagulation here. So this is that issue that a patient in the ICU,
though at increased risk of clotting from COVID-19. And we know that COVID-19 patients have an
increased risk. We felt reviewing the available literature that the risk of bleeding and associated
mortality was in favor of prophylactic intensity in that setting. So what's sort of the standard
right here? A patient ends up in the hospital, right? They're usually there because they're
hypoxic. The rubair oxygen level is below 94%. Somehow they've either not been vaccinated,
where they've missed the monoclonals or that small percent of people that progress. The
standard is to start anticoagulation. Here's a little more guidance on dosing. The remdesivir,
the dexamethasone. But what if they progress, right? We've talked about patients that are
requiring more oxygen support. We've talked about tosyllizumab in the past. But what if there's a
shortage of tosyllizumab as we're seeing in many parts of the country? Are there other options?
Well, there is another option that is in the guidelines, but let's talk about a publication
in the Lancet that just came out. This was in the Lancet Respiratory Medicine, efficacy and
safety of barisatinib for the treatment of hospitalized patients with COVID-19. This is the
cold barrier study. This was a randomized double-blind parallel group placebo-controlled phase 3 trial.
So this is, as I like to say, the much-awaited results of the cold barrier study. So as, you know,
really in the title, this was a phase 3 double-blind randomized placebo-controlled trial.
Participants were enrolled from 101 centers across 12 countries in Asia, Europe, North America,
South America. Hospitalized adults with COVID-19 received standard of care,
were randomized one-to-one to either receive once daily barisatinib for milligrams or matched
placebo for up to 14 days. The standard of care included corticosteroids such as dexamethasone,
antivirals, remdesivir. They reported the 28-day, all-cause mortality was 8%
for the 62 folks in the barisatinib and 13% for the 100 in the placebo group,
reporting a 38.2% relative reduction in mortality. There's a one additional death was prevented
per 20 treated, so a 20 number needed to treat to prevent one death. The 60-day, all-cause mortality
was 10% for barisatinib, 15% for placebo. The frequencies of serious adverse events were similar
between the two groups. So what is this drug, Dr. Griffin? Barisatinib is a Janus kinase
inhibitor. It interferes with the jack stat signaling pathway, and the thought is this is
actually reducing cytokine, particularly IL-6 production. Thus, the idea we were concerned,
using tosyllizumab and IL-6 receptor blocker without steroids because the IL-6 levels would
shoot up. Here, you're using this agent that actually reduces IL-6 production. In some other
studies, if you're unable to use steroids, this is still something that you could potentially use.
And actually, I'll say this is something that the IDSA has in their recommendations,
where they're saying, among hospitalized patients who are progressing, elevated
inflammatory markers, this is something you can consider, and also something you can consider
in a patient for whom steroids cannot be given for whatever reason. Long COVID, and I think it's
become really clear, but I'm going to add this to my list of pithy quotations. COVID is not just a
two-week viral illness for many people. I'm going to know early on, we had a lot of people
saying, you know, with COVID, either live or you die, you know, in this perception that it was two
weeks. But in the MMWR, the article, long-term symptoms among adults tested for SARS-CoV-2,
United States January 2020 to April 2021. This is hot off the press today, as we're recording.
And in this report, the authors administered a nationwide internet survey to 698 U.S. adults,
aged greater or equal to 18 years of age with a positive SARS-CoV-2 test. And they compared them
to 2,437 with a negative test. 2,750 had never been tested. And they reported for those with a
positive test, 65.9% had symptoms persisting for greater than four weeks. Now, the usual suspects,
fatigue, change in smell or taste, shortness of breath, cough, headache. But I'll say the same
challenges that we talked about previously in the adolescent study. There's a lot of background.
Now, we're seeing this above background. But a lot of challenges in sorting that out.
But I will say, this is another point in the line, you know, that long COVID is a real thing.
And a significant percent of people are not just better after two weeks. Now, there was also a
preprint posted severe COVID-19 is associated with sustained biochemical disturbances and
prolonged symptomatology, a retrospective, retrospective single center cohort study.
This is a paper that's up as a preprint, but it's submitted to the Journal of Critical
Medicine. So it'll go through peer review. I'm one of the authors, right? So it's not
talking a couple of my publications this time or preprint postings. And this really describes a
cohort of 168 patients with severe COVID-19 previously hospitalized and describes how in this cohort
they have sustained biochemical disturbances, elevated ferritin,
de-dimer, elevated neutrophil lymphocyte ratio. So it's nice to start having some objective data.
There's been a lot of ideas about what drives long COVID discussion about viral persistence,
continued antigenic stimuli. There's always been a lot of thought that this is something with the
immune system. So it's just nice to have some objective, maybe some breadcrumbs here to start
to understand and hopefully be able to help these individuals. What about low and middle
income countries and COVID? No one is safe until everyone is safe. I've been having this discussion
quite a bit that it is the right thing to do. It is the selfish thing to do to immunize the world.
Where are all these variants coming from that's keeping everyone awake at night? And we heard from
the White House COVID advisor, Jeffrey Zietz, that the US plans to invest $3 billion in the
vaccine supply chain as it continues to work to position itself as a leading supplier of vaccines
for the world. I heard some interesting musings by Anthony Fauci about maybe using the PEPFAR network
to help with vaccines. But then we just heard that COVAX, a global program to distribute COVID-19
vaccines, cut its 2021 forecast for available doses by one quarter. And there was what I thought
was an interesting disturbing New York Times article by Benjamin Mueller and Daniel E. Slotnick.
Let me quote, in its latest projection, the global immunization program known as COVAX
said that it expected to have a total of only, I'm throwing in only 1.4 billion doses available by
the end of 2021. In June, the program had said that it expected to have access to 1.9 billion doses
this year. Experts have said 11 billion doses are needed to slow the spread of the virus.
So just to give people perspective, as of now, less than half of a percent of all the doses
have been administered in low income countries. So this is not great. So and maybe with that,
I will just go into a reminder. During the months of August, September and October,
please go to parasiteswithoutboarders.com, go to donate. We are going to continue to support
floating doctors who are grouped down in Panama. And as we discussed last week,
they're going to be working with the Ministry. They're going to be getting vaccines out there
really help us because COVID, the COVID pandemic is a global pandemic. And if we don't treat it as
such, we're all at risk. Time for some email questions for Daniel. You can send yours to Daniel
at microbe.tv. John writes, I'm 71. Due to colon cancer, I've lost my spleen, pancreas, half of
one lung and a couple of feet of colon. My health is not great, but my diabetes and blood pressure
are well controlled. I received my second dose of Moderna vaccine in February. Is there a test that
I can request that will show the condition of my immune system? As of now, I don't feel at all
convinced that the vaccine has or will work for me as well as intended. The third dose is available
or soon will be. I will get one if only for additional protection against infection. And yes,
I do understand the difference between infection and disease. I really don't want the infection.
I'm fairly certain that the disease would knock me off my perch. I would really appreciate any
information on available tests that would help me to understand my position. Okay.
So good, good. And I appreciate that you added the sophistication at the end because I think
that sophistication is required. We do not have any great tests for telling how well does the
vaccine work against preventing disease, right, ending up in the hospital death. There is, I'll say
some information supporting the idea that there's a certain correlate between antibody levels and
infection. But I'm going to say that sort of with trepidation, you know, that this is growing,
we're learning about this, you know, I'm going to leave it sort of there. We do not have that
test, I think that you want, you want to go ahead and have a test and have that security.
There's certain ideas that certain levels of antibodies above a certain threshold might be
associated with a lower risk of infection. What am I going to advise you to do? So, you know,
you would probably be an individual as you describe who would qualify for that third shot.
We do not know exactly what that results in, right? We're still waiting for the science as
far as efficacy because you don't want to know what happens to my antibodies. You want to know
what happens to my risk of infection, what happens to my risk of disease. The second thing, you want
to continue to act cautiously. You do not want to have a run-in until we have antivirals, until we
have some other things that are that we can offer. And I mean effective antivirals, not remdesivir,
hopefully a product by Merck or Pfizer that comes out in the next couple months. So continue to
wear masks, continue to make smart decisions. Hopefully individuals like you will have more to offer.
Debbie writes, I'm an internist who has been educating the physicians in our medium-sized
primary care practice since the beginning of the pandemic. As I look to the future of this
virus becoming endemic, I'm trying to think how to frame this and what measures to follow.
It occurs to me that hospital strain, and that's not strain of virus, by the way. That's strain on
the hospital is one of the most important things to follow. In my home state of Texas, our non-medical
governor has decided 15% of beds being occupied by COVID patients was a measure of distress.
I can follow this number on the Johns Hopkins website from my state.
Locally, it's harder to follow. It seems that hospital strain numbers are not universally
agreed upon and also seem to change. Hospitals are used to growing capacity during surges and
emergencies. Is there any agreed upon and standardized measure of hospital strain,
and if so, any reliable website for looking at it? I'm also following the percent positive rate
only as an indication of adequacy of testing and then looking at cases per 100,000
per seven days on the CDC website or globalepidemics.org. Additionally, home testing or very easily
accessible testing is going to have to be a much bigger part of the solution moving forward.
$20 for two tests is too expensive. Here in Texas, it's hard to find home tests.
Scheduled tests are two days out and turnaround times are increasing.
A lot in that email. Talking first about hospital occupancy and how that correlates
with how much a hospital can handle. That's really the number. What is the percent of beds?
What's the hospital capacity? What's the percent of filled beds? The other is actually looking at
ICU, what percent of the beds? In New York, they actually have good sites that you can go to
keep track of that. That's one of the things. Remember, it's not just about COVID. You break
your leg. You're in a car accident. You need chemotherapy. There's a myriad of other reasons
why people end up going to hospital. If those beds are all full of COVID, that's a problem.
That does strain the system. There is a certain ability to deal with increased capacity surges.
We see this a lot of times with influenza, respiratory season. That's helpful.
Testing, yes. As you went through, that was a very sophisticated analysis. If you're in the UK,
you go to a website, and next thing you know, you've got free testing. Here in the US,
$10, $11 per test, that does not encourage people to get tested. If anything, it's pennywise pound
foolish. It is incredibly expensive when someone ends up in the hospital with COVID. It is a lot
cheaper to prevent that. Jamie writes, I am a primary care clinician, a family nurse practitioner
of 19 years with a doctor in translational research. Two clinical questions. One, we're in California
and have vaccine mandates for our public employee sectors. I had my first patient asking for a
medical excuse from the mandate, which as of now can be religious or medical. This 30 something
patient is currently undergoing infertility treatments and wants to wait until after she is
either pregnant or gives birth to get the vaccine. Ask me to put in writing that there are no risks
to pregnancy or fertility treatments, which of course I cannot do. I discussed with her the risks
of COVID while being pregnant and asked her to talk to her reproductive health provider and
come back in two weeks prior to the mandate's effective date so we can make a determination
while I do more research. I wanted to talk to our fellow clinicians and have an office-wide
approach knowing that the only real C.I. to vaccination is allergy to vaccine ingredients.
This person is in a forward-facing public law enforcement position. What would be your guidance
for this case as well as to guide policy protocols knowing there's always some flexibility for
clinicians when we issue protocols here. Yeah, so this is a great question, right? Because
this has been coming up and the patients are angry, right? And the way our healthcare system works.
Like, well, I'm going to find a doctor who or clinician, a provider, basically someone who's
going to sign this. And as this emailer, as you write in, there really are only these two exceptions,
either you have an anaphylactic issue, anaphylactic reaction to this vaccine. You have had an
anaphylactic reaction to that first dose you got, or you have an anaphylactic issue with one of
the components. Well, you're going to have to look at the mRNA, that's going to be the PEG 2000.
Look at J&J, you'll have to see if there's an issue there. But in general, there are very few
individuals, even individuals that have had other allergic issues, most of them can successfully be
vaccinated. What you're being asked is really the wrong question, guaranteeing this person
along healthy life and successful infertility treatments. None of us can do that. The vaccines
are not without risks. You know, this is like them asking for some sort of guarantee that that seat
belt will not cause sternal bruising if they get into an accident. Now, I think what this person
is requesting of you is not reasonable. So what we've tried to do as organizations is just put
in writing, these are the exceptions. And there was a recent call for Northwest, it was an email
that went out by David Battnelli, a really superior clinician and leader. And he basically said to
all the Northwell physicians, these are the exceptions. If you're giving exceptions,
if you're making up reasons for medical exceptions, that's not okay. And that really sounds what
this person is saying. They're saying, please give me a medical exception while I go through
these fertility treatments. That is not in the list of exceptions.
All right. Question number two, more personal on July 4th, my 45 year old otherwise healthy
husband developed chest pain, brought him to the ER. He had elevated D dimer, multiple RPE on CTA,
nodule and the thyroid currently being worked up. He had received a J&J vaccine 10 weeks prior
to this incident and had been feeling fatigued, reported to VAERS and they followed up right
away, but we don't know and may never know if this was a causative factor. So the question is,
should he opt for one of the mRNA injections instead of another J&J?
So sort of hearing this story, it's hard for me to know if there's any connection. It does not
sound in any way compelling for there to be a connection here. But this is that gray of medicine
where we always work where there's no reason not to use an mRNA vaccine in the future.
And I think that's a reasonable choice. But there's nothing you're telling me here that connects
the dots for me and makes me worry that this is J&J related.
All right. One more from Lynn. Just listen to an Andy Slavitt podcast with Johns Hopkins
epidemiologist Jennifer Newzo, very worthwhile discussion of post-vaccination infection.
A note that I don't use the word breakthrough. There was some discussion as well about boosters
and my impression was that global vaccine equity plays too small a role in the booster decision,
but that's not where my two questions for you lie. After the interview was over Slavitt opined
on several COVID related matters. He did a good job explaining waning, neutralizing antibodies
and memory T cells responding to viral attack. He then went on to say that the memory B cell
and T cell response is slower to appear. And that could lead to symptoms and disease
before full immune response kicks in. His argument for boosters is that those antibodies that appear
directly after a boost will afford more protection against symptoms and disease. If you're dead set
against symptoms, then a booster is your thing. Is this correct? To his credit, Slavitt gives a
very well articulated discussion on the pros and cons politically and medically of boosters.
He feels that boosters, the immunocompromised, vulnerable elderly and healthcare workers in the
U.S. is fair. Boosting everyone else before the rest of the world has vaccine access is not.
All right, let's do that one first. Okay, so first I'm going to say, Jennifer Newzo,
she's fantastic, right? And everything Jennifer says, I remember, I actually listened to that
podcast. And everything Jennifer says, I'm going to, I'm going to sort of thumbs up. She really gives
an ex expert scientific basis to what she has to say. Now I love Andy. Andy actually is an
old Optum executive, right? So he did a great job helping with the vaccine rollout. But I worry
about Andy is he's very articulate. He's very charismatic. He's very persuasive. He's not a doctor.
And so I often feel like he oversteps, right? So, you know, it's actually interesting if you
go back and listen to sort of his older podcasts and watches it evolves. Yeah, so I actually listen
to his podcast. He does a great job. But everything Andy says, take it with a grain of salt. He's a
great logistics guy. He's the guy you call if you want help, maybe using PEPFAR to get those
vaccines out there. But if you want good science, if you want good medical advice,
listen to his guests. So I would say if you have can only listen to one podcast, listen to
Twiv, not Slavitt. Yes. All right. Second question, Slavitt said that smarter people
than he are pushing for the J and J vaccinated to get an mRNA vaccine. Where's the data that
supports this? And would it be one dose or two? Yeah, I remember when he made that comment and,
you know, sort of say, he talked to a whole bunch of really smart people. And yeah, you know,
again, Andy Slavitt, he's charismatic. He's a great public speaker. But yeah, take it with
grain of salt. There's no science that supports that recommendation. I don't know who these smart
people are. By the way, Lynn has written into Twiv. She is the retired molecular biologist from
Western Massachusetts and grandmother to the epitope obsessed grandson. Oh, I love that.
Isn't that great? That's COVID-19 clinical update number 79 with Dr. Daniel Griffin.
Thank you, Daniel. Oh, thank you. And everyone, including events in BC.
