This week in virology, the podcast about viruses, the kind that make you sick.
From Microbe TV, this is Twiv, this week in virology, episode 806 recorded on September 16th, 2021.
I'm Vincent Rackeniello, and you're listening to the podcast all about viruses. Joining me
today from New York, Daniel Griffin. Hello, everyone. This is clinical update number 80,
and I have a question for you at the onset here, Daniel. This is an easy one. In the past
week, since we've spoken, what are the numbers looking like in the New York area?
The case numbers, and I think you could say this across the country, if you look at numbers,
we seem like we've sort of crested a little bit of a hump as far as cases. You look at deaths
nationally, not great, but again, we sort of talk about that lagging indicator. Here in the New
York area, and I'll kind of hit on this, we've been seeing only deaths about 40, 44, sort of
right around 40, low 40s. You can just think of how different that was from deaths back above
2000 a day in the New York area. So I will say, the hospitals, a few COVID cases in the hospitals,
in a highly vaccinated population, particularly in Nassau County, where I see a lot of folks,
vaccines have transformed COVID from an ICU from a hospital disease to a largely outpatient disease.
I had a call yesterday from a clinician colleague of mine, and he's saying, you know, Dan, I just
not feeling so great. I think it's just a call. I call my doctor, and he said, oh, it just sounds
like a common cold. And I'm like, really, like maybe a common cold coronavirus, like SARS-CoV-2,
after two shots of an mRNA vaccine. He's like, no, no, I talk to the doctor, and he doesn't
sound like COVID. And I said, you know, according to my good friend, Lisa Santoriello, it's a viral
disease. You realize that it can present just like a viral disease. The only way to tell whether or
not what you have is COVID or not is to go get a test. And Vincent, can you guess what that test
showed? I think it showed he was positive for SARS-CoV-2. Yes. So yes, it was positive, and you know,
then he went ahead and test his wife, his family, and you know, and it's not going to be coming
and doing consults with me for a little while till he finishes his isolation for the infected
period. You know, that's interesting. But so in immunized people, it can present like a common
cold, which is what the common cold coronas do in a largely immune population, right?
It's really interesting, you know, and I know we've talked about this from the beginning, right?
So if you got exposed to SARS-CoV-2 when you were younger, you know, would that, you know, be sort
of different later in life, you know, sort of, you know, will, is this what will happen? Let's say
parts of the world that have not been getting vaccines, you know, and what do we do sort of in
the future? In the future, a lot of young kids, let's say in the first few years of life,
get infected with SARS-CoV-2. What will sort of the future be there versus what we see now? Because
I think we talked about with the other, the non-SARS-CoV-2, the common coronaviruses,
you know, and I want people to quickly think and they name those. By the time you're six years old,
the majority of us have been infected. So it tends to be in that first like, you know, under five,
so be interesting to see over time. But, you know, I always like to say too to put that in context,
vaccines are like sunblock, right? You can't get vaccinated and then lay there on the beach at
the tropics naked all day, you know, they reduce our chances. And so my colleague is fortunate
that for him it was a mild case. But unfortunately, you know, when we hear the death numbers,
a few of those deaths every day, a number of those deaths every day, are in the vaccinated
who have other risk factors who couldn't mount that robust immune system. All right, let's start
with my quotation and I don't know if people know I am recording this on Yam Kapoor. And it is,
it will not be sundown until 701 here in New York. So my son Barnaby has some friends. He calls it
an intimate gathering daddy. It's just a few of us. It's not a super spreader event. So, you know,
we were basically figuring out that they were not allowed to eat until 701. And my wife was like,
but they're boys. I'm like, they can wait. They can wait. So for those of you who, you know,
I guess listen to this on Saturday, I hope that your fast was a good and gentle one.
But our quotation from Eli Weisel, the opposite of love is not hate. It's indifference. The opposite
of art is not ugliness. It's indifference. The opposite of faith is not heresy. It's indifference.
And the opposite of life is not death. It's indifference. When I graduated medical school,
Eli Weisel was still alive and actually spoke at Carnegie Hall at our medical school graduation
from NYU. And maybe as we get a little farther, I might throw in a little bit of the wisdom that
he shared. You know, at the time it ruffled my feathers, so to speak, in my young arrogant,
you know, finishing medical school, but really a wise man and a loss that he's no longer with us.
All right. You know, the update, I gave a little bit of an update right there, but I'm actually
going to go ahead and introduce a preprint right here in my update because I think it introduces a
really important concept when we're trying to understand what is going on around us.
And this was the preprint, the COVID-19 hospitalization metric in the pre and post vaccination eras
as a measure of pandemic severity, the retrospective nationwide cohort study. Now there was actually,
I think it was an Atlantic article that discussed this and I spoke to the author before he published
his piece. But here in this preprint, the author suggests that there may be limitations at just
looking at hospital numbers if one does not ask for a little more detail or dare I say nuance.
This was, I think, a really smart, really clever the way these researchers went about trying to
look at this data. So the investigators used the electronic records from the healthcare system
of the US Department of Veteran Affairs and looked for March 1, 2020 through June 30, 2021.
And they included 47,742 admissions. They then identified 38,508 unique patients with laboratory
confirmed SARS-CoV-2. And then a subset of this, they identified 28,731 that met the criteria for
moderate to severe COVID-19. Now what does that mean? They defined moderate to severe, I'm going to
say properly defined, moderate to severe COVID-19 disease, as a person who has a documented
oxygen saturation of less than 94%. So they were looking at these inpatient hospitalizations,
they were able to look through and see if they could find that that occurred during the admission.
And then they really looked at what percentage of these COVID-19 folks that were hospitalized
actually had this criteria, right? And we've talked about this before. You have to be careful
with geography. We talked about ICU. And putting someone in the ICU, there's a different threshold,
I'll say here in the New York Tri-State area, than there was, for instance, at my first job when
I was working at the VA in Helena, Montana. It was just me. It was the only guy there, the entire
weekend, 100-bed hospital. People ended up in the ICU for closer observation with a lower threshold.
I say, you didn't want to know. Are they in the ICU or not? You want to know, like, well,
why are they in the ICU? Are they in the ICU because it's done all by himself or are they in the ICU
because they really require that higher level of care? And what they report here is that prior
to January 2021, right? So prior to when vaccines became available, 64% of folks admitted to the VA
had that moderate to severe, had a documented saturation less than 94 versus 52%. So it fell
about 12% in this later period. Most strikingly, if you look at the vaccinated patients,
only 42.6%. So the minority of the vaccinated admissions had an oxygen saturation less than 94%.
And only a 15.8% of those admitted vaccinated patients were sick enough that their physicians
felt it was warranted to administer dexamethasone. So I think this has been sort of taken both ways
on social media, apparently. Some people say, you're minimizing COVID. But what I think this
actually is a reinforcement of the efficacy of vaccines like we talked about with my colleague,
not all COVID-19 hospitalizations are the same. So if an individual gets vaccinated,
they end up in the hospital, oh, my gosh, they must be so sick. Well, if their oxygen saturation is
above 94%, they're there just for a 48 hour, you know, quick stay, not much more than observation.
That is so much different than somebody ending up on high-fellow oxygen ending up in the ICU. So
again, nuance when we look at those hospitalization rates, we want to really be asking, you know,
what are we seeing here? Why are people being hospitalized and sort of getting that nuance there?
But I will say, death is death, right? Despite all the nuance here, if you go ahead and you look at the
at the world-o-meter dashboard, you know, how are we doing there? And I actually looked, you
know, we could go and we recorded TWIV clinical update 79 that day over 2000. So 2,107 people had
died that day. And if you go back to September 9th, you go back about a year ago, that number was
1,072. So that's twice that number. But then if you look a little bit, again, a little granular,
if you look at places with high vaccination rates, like here in New York, as Vincent and I were
discussing, we're seeing about 40 deaths a day, right? If you go to Texas, you can imagine that
count is much higher. And I just checked right before we recorded this. So yesterday, so not
September 15th, 2,284 deaths for just one day. This is the issue, right? If you roll, if you
remove the masks, remove all the non-pharmaceutical interventions, and you still have a large, and we
still have a chunk of our population that is unvaccinated. Children, COVID, and mental health, right?
Children are at risk for COVID, wearing a mask is less traumatic for a child than being hospitalized.
You know, I went ahead and I looked at, and as I've sort of mentioned, the CDC has tracking the
American Academy of Pediatrics has tracking. We're still seeing just an unacceptable number
of children being infected here in the US per week. We're still in sort of that quarter million
a week level. Now, I should say, so I'm part of this COVID kids consortium that was organized by
Christie Short. She's a virologist down in Australia. I don't know if you mentioned you may know her.
And this was sort of an interesting international group that Dr. Short put together. And our goal
here is to provide meaningful data on COVID in children and adolescents, and really to look at
not only high, but middle, low income countries with all the different quality data challenges
in different settings. But after this last meeting, I was forwarded a pre-print, which I share with
Vincent. I share with Amy. I asked a couple of other folks to look at this. And the pre-print
was biological features of SARS-CoV-2 infection in children. And this pre-print certainly will
benefit from the peer review process. I mean, there's a couple sort of painful things. They equate
viral RNA copy number with viral load. I think we've been trying to point out that those are
not equivalent. They do viral culture. They do assessment of sideopathic effects. They report
semi-quantitative viral titers. And I thought it was worth a review and I look forward to it
improving. But you know, some of the interesting things in here, the youngest kids do not have
lower RNA copy numbers as assessed by RT-PCR. Lower age kids were not less likely to have
cultural virus. It was really mostly in those first five days after symptom onset that virus
could be cultured. The anterior nary samples looked like that was fine, right? We've talked about
that before. So in a lot of ways, it's sort of confirming a lot of things that we've been saying,
just really dispelling a lot of these early myths. But then maybe a few takeaways. You can in these
children, particularly if you're going to be doing serial sampling, you can do the anterior
naries. You do not need to do that beautiful, potentially painful, and traumatizing deep,
blind, middle-turbinate brain biopsy swab. But again, this sort of supports, I think,
that we really need to understand what's going on in children. And they're not some special class
that when exposed does not get the virus. Children can get infected. Children can have
replication-competent virus at high levels. So this is update 80. So hopefully something
a little special here. The pre-exposure period, right? This is when we're all worried about
transmission, exposure, what can we do? And I always say never miss an opportunity to test. And now,
again, masks are cool. Hopefully people remember that because the CDC updated their mask guidance
with some really nice graphics. And I have to say, it's still shocking to me that this far into
the pandemic, people are still wearing masks incorrectly. I find when I walk around, I need
to ask people, do we need to get you a lighter mask? It seems to be falling down. We need the
kind with the helium to keep it above your nostrils. So just a little refresher here. And I'm actually,
when we get to the end here, I'm going to bring out some samples. So maybe this will be the time
people want to tune into YouTube to see some of the masks. So we talk about masks, but really what
we're talking about and what the CDC highlights on their updated guidance, go to cdc.gov.
Types of masks is sort of the end of the URL. And they talk about masks, right? These are designed
to contain your respiratory droplets and particles. They're really source control. They provide only
some protection for you, really mainly they're protecting others. I've used the surgeon analogy.
He's got that. So he doesn't cough, spit, or infect the wound. He's not so much protecting
himself and the patient. And the other side, respirators, right? We throw them in with masks.
But these are really designed to protect the wearer from particles. And this is going to be
something I will go through. They repeatedly in their guidance here, reference, nose wires, right?
You want this mask to fit you properly. And maybe this is an opportunity. I would say this is
mainly sort of started off as physicians listening. But every time you see a patient,
here's your opportunity to teach them how to properly adjust that nose wire so that it fits
properly. When I show the little props later, you can actually add a nose wire to a lot of masks.
You can order these iron on. But you really want to make sure this fits properly. And they also
come in a little bit about facial hair. We almost need Dixon here to show the issue with excessive
facial hair, not just with masks, but also, you know, scratchy microphone issue. But I'm also
going to do a little bit of a shout out for an organization. You know, they were talking about
masks before anyone else was, perhaps. And this is an organization called the American Conference
of Governmental Industrial Hygienesis, the A-C-G-I-H. And this organization is a 501c3. They've been
around for over 80 years focusing on the advancement of occupational environmental health. And they
actually have a really, I thought sort of a nice graphic where you get to add, you know,
what if people around me are wearing masks? What if I'm wearing masks? What about the different
masks? Sort of where does that put me from a safe point of view? But with that said, I'm going to
reach behind me and grab my props vents. And I have several masks behind me. And they're looking
at this CDC site and they have a page of all the different kinds of facial hair you could have.
I didn't know. Isn't that great? I mean, you didn't realize all your options. So,
I don't know if people are going to come away with a better understanding of the impact on
masks or like new ideas for, you know, personal appearance. So, let me start off with sort of
the bottom of the heat, my so-called, this is my cloth mask without a nose wire. So, I,
and you can see I put that on. Maybe there's a little bit of decrease, but there's a lot of
air coming up around the nose. So, we have our cloth mask. Now, our cloth masks are probably our,
we'll say, least effective source control, least effective protection, right? So, that's our cloth
mask. But the cloth mask can actually be improved by adding a nose wire and making sure that the
mask is fitted better to your face. So, this is our famous Dr. Who. Masks are cool. And you can see
here, if you're watching on YouTube, that there is this nose wire. You may want to go over to the
mirror. You want to make sure that nose wire is bent so it goes sort of in and then flares out
so you get a nice seal at the top. This is one of those examples you can put on your reading
glasses, for instance. And you shouldn't see much of a fog, right? And as we go later, we'll try
that again with some other masks. Now we move up, right? Those are truly masks. What is our last
mask in the heap? And this is our surgical mask. And these are actually a material that actually has
improved ability to create local source control. Again, it has the nose wire. Bring this up.
And this is what you'll notice that physicians, that surgeons, that healthcare workers, nurses,
nurses, a, it's really a lot of folks in the hospital wearing these almost at all times. A
lot of hospitals, you have to wear them. I say almost at all times because people love to pull
them off to speak and generate droplets, which, you know, I walk away quickly. And then we move
from masks to respirators. The first is the KN95. And I know I've talked about this quite a bit.
And you can see here, this is a KN95. It also has the built in metal. So again, you need to
shape this can't just pop it on your face. And this actually creates a fairly reasonable
seal. But again, this is a KN95. This does not necessarily meet US NIOSH standards, right? So
the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health. When we've studied these, which are
actually approved, so the KN95 are sort of approved by, well, not kind of, they are approved by the
Chinese, they are not quite as effective as the N95s. The N95s, let's hit that. And I have a
couple here before we move on. So this first one here, and healthcare workers that are using
N95s, these are actually fitted. We actually get tested. Since I work at several hospitals,
I get tested everywhere. And you can see there the strap actually broke as I put this on. They're
not, they're not necessarily designed for multi-use. These fit really close. And you'll actually
notice that if I put my glasses on, not much fogging, right? And these are actually often
designed, I'll pull this off, to vent the air away so it doesn't. And we have several options.
Here's another one, sort of a flat duck bill, the 3M. This is my favorite. The N95s, these are
actually made up to a highest standard. And now I have to say, to be honest, we have these made
in the US. Supplies are better. Maybe I should say N95s, they're not just for healthcare workers
anymore, echoing the serial commercials. But those are our choices. And I think this far into the
pandemic, it's pretty obvious not only that masks work, but I think it's really critical
that we understand masks, respirators, how to use them. And if you see a friend,
or an enemy, or someone in between, not properly wearing that mask, you know, feel free to sort of
help them. It's like someone with a crooked bow tie. I am sure they want you to help them out.
And again, in the string of points making a line, we had another MMWR looking at the effectiveness
of masks. And this was the MMWR report, SARS-CoV-2 transmission to masked and unmasked close
contacts of university students with COVID-19, St. Louis, Missouri, January through May 2021.
And just briefly, in this MMWR, they compared only masked exposures with close contacts
with unmasked exposures, right? So you're exposed to someone who has SARS-CoV-2.
What happens if you get exposed to someone as a mask or is unmasked? So this is source control.
That unmasked every one of those unmasked exposures, they found a higher adjusted odds of a positive
test. Each additional exposure was associated with a 40% increase in odds of a positive test.
So just people keep asking like, oh, where's the data on masks? Lots of data. There's lots of
points here in the line. All right, so moving away from masks back to testing, perhaps one of my
favorite topics, daily testing or contacts of individual with SARS-CoV-2 infection and attendance
and SARS-CoV-2 transmission in English, secondary schools and colleges, an open label, cluster,
randomized trial. And I think we may have discussed this in pre-perform, but here it is, peer-reviewed.
And this is a paper looking at test to stay versus the quarantine approach, right? So you have an
individual who's had an exposure, you say, oh, you got to stay home for 10 or 14 days, or you say,
you know what, you can keep coming to school. We're just going to test you every day. How well does
the test to stay work in this study? So this involved 201 schools in England. They randomly
assigned 201 schools, and there were 99 in the control group. There were 102 in the intervention
group. This was a 10-week study from April 19th to May 10th of 2021. And then it continued into a
pre-appointed stop date, June 27th, 2021, right? Get your 10 weeks. At the end of the day, not
everyone participated, but 76 control group schools and 86 intervention group schools actively participated.
There were 59.1 per 100,000 symptomatic PCR confirmed cases in control, 61.8 per 100,000 per week in
the intervention group. So not a significant difference. So again, demonstrating the ability
of these rapid lateral flow tests to actually perform very well in a test to stay school program.
Because I think this is going to be a big issue in the future, right? You know, everyone is worried,
if we do all these tests, we're going to have all these kids missing school when they don't need
to. This is a way to say we can test, and then we can actually continue to test, and we can
get people staying in school, continuing to have those educational opportunities in a safe environment.
All right. Active vaccination. We're still in that pre-exposure period. Never miss an
opportunity to vaccinate. Vaccination is how this pandemic ends. And I added a new one. And
this is sort of, I feel like I'm channeling you, Vincent, vaccines, the jabs that keep you from
getting sick. And I wanted to talk a little bit about vaccine conversations, right? So back to Eli
Wiesel. You know, one of the things that he told me, you know, when I was there at Carnegie Hall,
I'll, you know, full of myself because I just got my MD degree. And he said, you know what,
I know you guys, you think you know it all, but the first thing I want to impress upon you,
listen to your patients. And I think that's the big thing. When we have someone who comes in and
sees us and they have been vaccinated, that's not the time to scold. That's not the time to tell
them how smart you are and how much you know, that's the time to listen, right? And I think this is
going to be more important because as we look in the coming weeks, vaccines potentially moving
into younger ages, the antibactors are going to be on their home turf here, right? They've got all
their arguments ready to go and they just need to pop, you know, something new in. So listen,
find out what the concerns are. Let's let's really focus on people who have questions. There's a
certain crowd, you know, and I think sort of going back to Eli Weisels, which maybe we just
don't need to engage. We need to spend our time and resources on those people that are interested
that have questions that are not really there just to anyway. Okay, so now a little bit about
hybrid immunity. I like this preprint. So this is a preprint, high genetic barrier to escape
from human polyclonal SARS-CoV-2 neutralizing antibodies posted as a preprint. And here the
researchers used an HIV-1 pseudotyped variant system with a synthetic poly mutant spike that
they generated by aggregating variant of concern associated and plasma selected spike mutations
into a single poly mutant spike protein. Quite a mouthful, right? And actually I have to say this
was sort of similar to the work that I was doing actually just not too far from Vincent's office
before the pandemic started. But using this system, they were able to show that 20 naturally
occurring mutations in SARS-CoV-2 spike were sufficient to confer near complete resistance to
the polyclonal neutralizing antibodies generated by convalescence and mRNA vaccine recipients, right?
So you put these 20 mutations in the spike and if you had an infection in the past where you had
a couple doses of the MNR vaccine, your plasma actually was not able to neutralize this. However,
and in this discovery, plasma from individuals who'd been infected and then got the mRNA vaccine,
they were able to neutralize not only SARS-CoV-2 but also diverse other viruses in the same
coronavirus family. So let's just translate this a little because I think this could be
quite something. This is first of all, it's about neutralizing antibodies and changes in the spike
protein, right? So it's not the whole complete picture looking at T cells, which we think are
less sensitive to changes in spike. The researchers went ahead and they defined these 20 changes in
the spike protein, ending up this near complete resistance to these neutralizing antibodies.
And either people had COVID infection or people that got the Pfizer or the Moderna vaccines,
the co-mariniti or the spike vaccine. They say mutations, but we're really dealing with amino
acid changes, so the mutations in the genetic code that led to amino acids which changed the
spike protein. Now they did show this, I think, rather interesting COVID first than two doses of
mRNA vaccines. But there were really, I thought, I'm going to say four interesting questions and
I'm hoping the reviewers asked them to address these prior to full publication. What about people
who were vaccinated and then got an infection? Like I described my colleague, what does the
antibodies from that individual look like? The next, and I think this is sort of time sensitive,
what about an individual that gets that booster, right? We're talking about boosters and certain
individuals getting those. What about someone who got a booster and then got infected? I think
that's an interesting is that we're sort of weighing now if we give boosters versus exposure. Are we
risking trouble with boosters? Original antigenic sin or the butterfly effect? So I'm going to leave
that for a deeper dive with maybe our immune colleagues. And then, of course, what about those
folks that got the J&J vaccine? So the red-headed stepchildren, they feel left out. What about people
that got the J&J? How are they doing? And of course, boosters. We can't not mention boosters,
but that's all I'm going to do here is just mention boosters. There was a very well-written
and referenced viewpoint piece in the Lancet, considerations in boosting COVID-19 vaccine
immune responses. And what I'm going to do here is I'm going to suggest that people not only take
the time to read this brief three-page piece, but also go ahead and listen to TWIV 805.
I really, Vincent, you guys did a great job of walking through kind of the questions, the issues
there. The FDA will have actually met prior to this dropping on Saturday. But really, I thought
this piece outlined a lot of the questions. I mean, the FDA wants their decisions, their
recommendations to be driven by the science. And I think a lot of those questions about boosters,
one is, is there really waning immunity that we're concerned about?
Two, if you give people a booster, is there a benefit? What is the safety profile? Who has the
best risk benefit should boosters be given out there? We're doing it now to individuals who have
immune suppression. So, you know, organ transplant recipients, people with that sort of level of
immune suppression. We know the antibodies go up. We need to know, is it more than that? Is this
really effective? And we can talk about that. Passive vaccination, right? Just to close out our
pre-exposure period of time, remember, monoclonals after high-risk exposures in high-risk people.
But now we move to the period of viral replication. It's gotten through, and now the individual is
actually infected. And during the viral symptom phase, I say the time for monitoring and monoclonals,
not the time for antibiotics, and not the time for steroids. And I'm going to hit a little bit
on steroids after I just sort of bring people up to date on what's going on with monoclonals.
People have finally fully embraced monoclonals. And now, for the first time, there's concerns
about shortages, right? We're shipping out 150,000 doses a week. I think we're US governments
paying about $1,000 a dose. So, I think we're spending about $150 million a week on monoclonals.
That's a lot of money. And we got an announcement from the US Department of Health and Human Services.
Let me read this and put it in context. The recent increase in the prevalence of the Delta variant
of COVID-19 has caused a substantial surge in the utilization of monoclonal antibody drugs.
It remains the goal of the federal government to ensure continued availability of these drugs
for current and future patients. As such, HHS is immediately implementing the following changes
to help promote optimal and equitable use of the available supply of monoclonal antibodies
while we continue efforts to procure additional products, limiting immediate orders and shipments
only to administration sites with HHS protect accounts and current utilization reporting
and reviewing all orders for alignment with utilization. So, what is this? Basically,
the federal government is jumping in saying we need to make sure that these products are used
appropriately. We're going to be sending them to sites that are giving us the data so that we
know what's going on. What is the HHS protect? This is really an ecosystem. This is a secure platform
for authentication, amalgamation, and sharing of healthcare information. Really looking for
the ability to keep an eye and make sure that these drugs, which are now becoming
in limited supply as opposed to sitting on shelves, are really going to the people that need them.
This is sort of prompt that I think fear, fear about shortages that I hope are exaggerated.
There was sort of this idea for a while that you don't need to get vaccinated because you can
always get your monoclonals and now people are a little worried. Maybe I should get my vaccine
because maybe I can't just get that monoclonal. But the current U.S. administration reported that
they will buy more than 1.7 million more doses of the monoclonal antibodies. They're going to get
the bulk 1.4 million from Regeneron. Another 388,000 are coming from Eli Lilly, and perhaps
we'll hear about even more being purchased from V or GSK. There's even a couple other
companies out there trying to move for e-way for their products as well. Just to keep this on
people's radar, I've been bringing this up for a while. I'm waiting for the data to share.
But we are expecting October and November, December applications for e-way of effective
oral antivirals. We've got multiple companies working on several products. So some optimism
there that we're going to have another option. But I want to go back to steroids. This is the
individual shows up at a primary care office. Maybe they show up at an urgent care. They're in that
first week. They're in their viral symptom phase. We know some folks. Maybe they're not listening
to Twiv. They're trying to do the right thing. They throw some steroids, some vitamins, some
antibiotics at the patient. Well, is that harmless? Is that okay? Well, this was a really nice meta
analysis, a systemic review, steroid use in non-oxygen requiring steroids use in non-oxygen
requiring COVID-19 patients a systematic review and meta analysis. So they initially identified
6,411 studies. They then screened 2,990 after an initial exclusion. And then they finally narrowed
it down to seven studies, which fit the criteria. So we're ultimately looking at 2,214 non-oxygen
requiring COVID-19 patients. And I think this is really critical. Overall, odds of progression to
severe disease among the non-oxygen requiring COVID-19 patients receiving steroids was 5.97.
So basically by trying to be helpful by giving steroids in that first week, you were increasing
a patient's odds of progressing to severe disease, 6, almost 6-fold. And you increase their odds of
death 1.35. So a 35% increase in their chance of death as compared to patients not receiving steroids.
You also increase the mean duration of fever. You increase the mean duration till viral clearance.
And if they did end up in the hospital, you increased their length of hospital stay with the median
of 20.8 days. You know, I've got to say this is just sort of reinforcing. During that first week,
we don't have a lot. We can offer the monoclonals to a certain subset, but we certainly can harm
these individuals. They have a really nice figure, figure 4 in this paper, where you can actually
compare folks that did or didn't get steroids. And you can see the harm that can be done here.
So again, for the first week, this is the time for monitoring and monoclonals. It is not the time
for antibiotics. It is not the time for steroids. We can do harm with steroids. We could significantly
increase a person's chance of ending up in hospital. And we also know, as we talked about,
with azithromycin, with doxycycline, other antibiotics, these are not helpful and potentially harmful.
I think we talked about the one doxycycline study, where there was a 5-fold increase in death,
just given those those antibiotics. So remember, we can harm people during this first week. But then,
once they progress to that second week, this is when people often get hospitalized,
we have really good evidence for benefit of steroids, if they have an oxygen saturation
less than 94%. So that matters and timing really matters with COVID. And we also had a nice review
of steroids in the hospital setting. And so this was review in adults with severe critical COVID-19,
corticosteroids reduce mortality versus standard care and analysis with or without the recovery
trial. So this is seven randomized control trials, one cohort study published in international
immunopharmacology. And I really like this because I think we've talked a little bit about meta
analyses. But you have to be careful that your meta analysis is not being swayed too heavily by
just one study, right? Otherwise, it's really not a meta analysis, it's that one study pushing
things. And the recovery trial done by the folks in the UK was a large trial. So you want to pull
that out and say without that, how do we do? So a total of 6771 patients from these eight
prospective studies, seven randomized control, one prospective cohort were included in this meta
analysis. And the results showed that corticosteroid therapy at the right time in the right patients
was associated with lower mortality in severe COVID-19. So an odds ratio of 0.70. So a 30%
reduction in mortality. Since the proportion of recovery trial was so large, they remove that.
When you remove that, the odds ratio was 0.65. So a 35% reduction in mortality. So even without
that study, we're still seeing this 30, 35%. So we're seeing a clear mortality benefit.
So remember, this is when we're using steroids. It's when we're using remdesivir, pulmonary
support, anticoagulation, and then only in select patients further immune modulations such as
tosyllismab or barisitinip. Okay. The tail phase long COVID, sort of an exciting announcement,
I will say this last week. As we've been saying, COVID is not just a two week viral illness for
many people. On Wednesday, September 15th, the NIH announced NIH builds large nationwide study
population of tens of thousands to support research on long term effects of COVID-19.
So the NIH awarded nearly $470 million to New York University, NYU, Langone Health,
New York City, which will make multiple subawards to more than 100 researchers at more than 30
institutions and will serve as the recovery clinical science core. So this combined population
of research participants from new and existing cohorts called the medical court will comprise
this recovery cohort. And this funding is being supported by the American Rescue Plan.
So this is really an attempt. We've seen over the last 18, 20 months, a little longer now.
A lot of money was spent. A lot of trials were set up. We don't have the data we would like.
This is really an attempt to say long COVID, it's important, post-acute squelly of COVID.
This is important. We need to do this right. We need to establish a cohort. We need to make
sure this is studied properly. We need to be organized when we do this. So yeah, it's taken a
little longer than a lot of us would hope to get this set up. But I'm really optimistic that we
are now going to do this correctly. And I will mention NYU, that's my medical school alma mater.
So I'm sure they will do a great job. All right. Now, what about the rest of the world? No one is
safe until everyone is safe. So is there really a false dichotomy regarding vaccinating the world?
Perhaps the most selfish thing we can do is now vaccinate the world. And there's I think an upcoming
Twib is going to be looking at sort of analysis. What is the best way to use our vaccines?
But one of the concerns that has been coming up is are we allowing these variants to evolve to
develop in these areas? So there was a research article, a year of genomic surveillance reveals
how the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic unfolds in Africa as published in science. And in this article,
the authors describe the genomic epidemiology of SARS-CoV-2 using a data set of 8,746 genomes
from 33 African countries and two overseas territories. Really interesting. And I think
what I'm going to do is I'm going to tell people keep listening to Twib upcoming episodes where we
get a deeper dive into the variants and what's going on and what is the calculus with vaccines.
Coming up, we have the UN. I guess they're meeting on Tuesday. And there's going to be a whole
discussion about how we successfully vaccinate the world. Hopefully, a lot of creative ideas about
how we get this done. But on that note, I'm going to say throughout the months of August,
September and October, go to parasiteswithoutboarders.com, donate. Donations made to parasites without
borders will be doubled up to $40,000 in total support for floating doctors, help them continue to do
the great work they're doing down there in Panama. Time for some email questions. For Daniel,
you can send yours to Daniel at microbe.tv. Alison is very concerned about children. She's been
thinking for a few weeks that the next 12 weeks are going to be full of thousands of children dying
under 12 years of age. She wants to know, are any of the monoclonal treatments approved or in
trials for people that young? That is a challenge, right? The same population under 12, that is not
eligible for vaccination is not eligible for the monoclonals as well. I think if we look at the
numbers, we're not talking about thousands of children dying. And a couple things I'm going to
say here, you know, I've always talked about like, you know, we need to care about children. When we
talk about a pandemic of the unvaccinated, we are talking more and more about children when we say
that. Schools are opening and people are worried. But I think I've tried to point out several times
and share some of the science on this is that we can safely have children in these environments.
It involves several layers of protection. It actually can sometimes even be safer than keeping
them out of the schools. It involves masking, testing, vaccinating all the people around them
that can be vaccinated, testing. So there's a lot of ways to do this. We certainly can do it poorly.
But no, I think we can do this safely. And I think we're waking up. We're sort of being
reminded, Oh my gosh, this is still, we are still in the middle of a pandemic. And I think we're
starting to see the numbers go down. So I am optimistic here going forward. And I think I've been sort
of suggesting that maybe by Halloween, there'll be vaccines for the younger kids. But then again,
you know, the FDA is getting a lot of pressure and what we really want is an FDA we can trust,
an FDA that follows the science. So when we do move to less than 12, we want to know what's the
safe dose? What are the things we should be watching out for? How do we make this as safe and effective
as possible? And it is really hard, I know, during a pandemic to wait.
So Jeff is at Koga University and asks about what to do with students who test positive. So
they have a 96% vaccination rate. But when students test positive, they have to be
quarantined. And he writes, given the data that shows a rapid decrease in viral RNA, as well as in
the ability to detect infectious virus and vaccinated individuals following infection,
it would seem reasonable to decrease the length of isolation time for vaccinated individuals,
as they would unlikely be able to transmit virus past, say, six days post positive instead of
10 days. Of course, we're going to continue to follow the New York state guidelines. But wonder
if it would be reasonable to lobby these agencies for reduced isolation time for vaccinated
individuals. Would love to hear your thoughts on this issue. Yeah, you know, actually, I've got to
say you bring up an interesting concept, the idea of lobbying organizations. I always think what
my natural responses is we need the science. The organizations can respond when we have the
science. And what we really need is not lobbying, but funding so that these investigations can be
done. Because right, we have a growing body of evidence that, you know, there's a certain window
of time when a person is infectious, right, that two days before that three to five days afterwards.
With an individual who's vaccinated, do they really need isolation of the infected for 10 days?
Maybe not. But I think what we need is we need the science, and then you bring the science,
and then the science helps us move forward. And the other, I hope, is the concept of the test
to stay. So when an individual test positive, maybe that isolation is shorter. But maybe the
exposures don't need to necessarily stay home quarantining. Maybe they can test to stay.
And that's something where we're seeing a growing body of evidence to suggest that
could be safely implemented. Ingrid wants to know should individuals who are vaccinated and test
positive for COVID take monoclonal antibodies? So, you know, we say we don't we don't look at
vaccination status when making decisions about monoclonals. But to be honest, right,
did we study the monoclonal specifically in people who are vaccinated? We use the same
criteria. If you are considered at a high risk of progressing, whether or not you are vaccinated,
if you are symptomatic, then we'd recommend monoclonals. If you're completely asymptomatic,
and that's sort of a point here, completely asymptomatic individuals vaccinated, unvaccinated,
you need to at least have some symptomatology, and then one high risk or other feature for going
ahead with monoclonals. But vaccination is in no way an exclusion.
And finally, Dan is a pediatric pulmonologist who retired in 2016 after 36 years in pediatric
medicine. I've been an advocate of asthma education in the school and at home since.
I've been following your updates at Twiv for several months. Appreciate your review of the
literature. Since the pandemic began, I've been following local data in San Antonio.
As a private citizen, I have been confused and do not understand why pediatric data are not reported,
similar to adult data. And Dan goes on to write about his experience with pediatric critical care
early in his career and how having such data would be important. So he writes,
the low numbers do not reflect the tragedy at the local level as an asthma or flu. I question
any death in a child as preventable. I've only filed intermittently. If you've discussed this
issue before, let me know. But I'd like to know your thoughts on this.
No, I mean, I think this is great. And I think I've always tried for a while to start off the
updates with children and COVID and try to steer people towards where those resources are. So
the American Academy of Pediatrics, the CDC has a special site looking at this. It is interesting
that you can't just toggle and get this information more readily, like the Hopkins or the World
Ometer dashboard, just click. I want to specifically look at the age group that I'm focused on here.
So yeah, I agree. And I think that it's, as I mentioned, from the beginning, it's sort of in
this odd, touchy subject. And there's also been a lot of, I think, false ideas where people say,
you know what? Let me look at the data year ago when the kids were locked in basements and they
were not getting exposed to COVID and boy, there were no hospitalizations. So I think we can safely
just open the schools without masks and let them all get infected. They'll be fine. Now that they're
opening the schools and getting infected, we're seeing the kids are not all right. We're seeing
thousands of hospitalizations per week. We're seeing a couple deaths every day on average.
That is in no way. Okay. So yeah, I share that we need to need to have this data front and center.
I mean, right now the conversation is all about boosters. Yeah, that's fine. And all
let's talk about the people that haven't even had a first shot and who are at risk and getting
infected. In the interest of time, I've been abbreviating some of these letters, but I encourage
listeners to go to microbe.tv slash to have you can find all the text of all of them online there.
They're very useful to read. That's COVID-19 clinical update number 80 with Dr. Daniel Griffin.
Thank you, Daniel. Oh, thank you. Vincent, you and everyone else be safe.
