This week in virology, the podcast about viruses, the kind that make you sick.
From Microbe TV, this is Twiv, this week in virology. Episode 808 recorded on September 23, 2021.
I'm Vincent Draconiello, and you're listening to the podcast all about viruses. Joining me today
from New York, Daniel Griffin. Hello, everyone. Episode 81, or I should say clinical update,
number 81, Daniel. My question for today, when do you think five to 12-year-olds will get vaccinated?
You know, that's going to be right in my first section on children and COVID, Vincent.
All right. I feel like you've preempted it, but let's get going and we'll get right there.
So I will start off with a quotation, no pessimist ever discovered the secret of the stars,
or sailed to an uncharted land, or opened a new doorway for the human spirit.
And that is Helen Keller. And next to the Helen Keller Institute is just down the road from me,
prior to the pandemic, prior to me slipping on a wet surface and tearing the lateral medial
meniscus in my left knee, my family and I would all do the Helen Keller fundraiser yearly run. So
maybe at some point when I can free up some time in my schedule to fix that knee, I'll be doing that
again. But what an inspirational woman. As far as an update, you know, people, it's so regional
in our country. It's so regional in the world, right? What's been happening? We are seeing things
get a little bit better, particularly here in the New York area. You know, part of what I tell
people when they ask me, this is only so many people that can get infected or vaccinated. So
there is, you know, there is that. But let's get right into children. So we have some, I'm going to
say exciting things on the horizon or that we're hearing here. And I think finally people have
come to realize that children are at risk for COVID. I think that's just sort of black
and white. That was really a bit of a mistake and it's unfortunate. You know, if we say we're
still seeing about a quarter million children a week get infected. We're seeing thousands of
children end up in the hospital. We're seeing a number of children die every week here in the
U.S. and worldwide that continues. I've talked about resources in the past. Not only can you go
to the AAP site, not only can you go to the special CDC pediatric data, I'm going to throw
another site at you and this is COVID net and this is at GIS.cdc.gov. And here you can actually
break down by age what is going on with regard to different things, particularly hospitalizations.
And it's a bit disturbing when you look at the rate of hospitalization per 100,000 broken down by
individuals under 18. And the highest is in the zero to four really, really disturbing.
The youngest children are being impacted. So we're going to talk about a couple things today
about what might be done to help those individuals. And saying that we're going to talk first about
children, people aged five to 12. So straight to vaccines for five to 12. So on Monday,
September 20th at 6.45 AM, I think everyone, you got to get up at 6.44 and be ready for these
headlines. We saw the press release from Pfizer with the headline Pfizer and biotech announced
positive top line results from pivotal trial of COVID-19 vaccine in children five to 11 years.
And so Pfizer and BioNTech announced results from a phase two, three trial showing a favorable
safety profile and robust neutralizing anybody responses in children five to 11 years of age
using a two dose regimen of 10 micrograms administered 21 days apart, a smaller dose than the 30
micrograms that's currently be used in people 12 and older. So all right, so that's the headline.
But what was the what was the data? We don't have it all. It's not peer reviewed. We're going to get
more coming. But in this trial, they reported data from 2,268 participants age five to 11 years
of age. And they reported that the SARS-CoV-2 neutralizing antibody geometric mean titer
was 1,197.6, one month after the first dose in this group compared to 1,146.5 from participants
aged 16 to 25 who had gotten the 30 microgram. That was the control group. So really, you're
getting about the same confidence interval overlap. Really, the median mean there geometric mean
is actually a higher higher. So the point here, and I think we need to talk about this a little,
is this is exciting news. You're seeing this robust response. You're seeing that a smaller
dose can be used. So don't just go out and use the 30 microgram dose off label. Pfizer is in
preparation to go ahead and make these smaller doses. They're going to new production challenges
to make this happen. For the United States, the companies expect to include this data in a near
term submission for EUA as they continue to accumulate safety and efficacy data.
But a couple things, and I'm sure this will be a discussion, this is a 2,268. So we say safety
data. That's a small number of individuals. As this rolls out in the first four to eight weeks,
we're going to get what we call phase four data where we have post-marketing. So there will be
some parents. I'm sure that we'll want to wait a few extra weeks. And this is going to be sort of
that balance between what we're seeing now with quarter million individuals here in the US alone
getting infected thousands in the hospital. Parents will want to weigh that risk benefit
during the first four to eight weeks as we get even more safety data on this age group.
Daniel, how do you figure out 10 micrograms? And it's from going from 11 to 12 years,
it seems like a sharp cut. How does that work? Yes. No, I still remember, right? Like,
Barnaby turned 16. He was going to almost qualify, and then they dropped the EUA for
younger ages. So we were looking at Barnaby 15 years at nine months, and he didn't qualify for
the vaccine, but magically in three months. And then on the bottom end here, what about those
younger children? What about children who are two, three, and four? So your four years, your 11
months, maybe you're large for your age. So yeah, these cutoffs are not exact science. So,
yeah. But presumably they have some experience on dosing for different ages. And so they use that
to calculate 10 micrograms, I suppose, right? Well, you know, with the mRNA vaccines, we don't
have quite as much experience as we would like, right? So the amount of mRNA and the Moderna vaccine
is three times more. And maybe that will turn out to be relevant in some things that we discussed
later. Okay. All right. Now we move to that pre-exposure transmission testing period. I like to say
never miss an opportunity to test, to test, and remember, masks are cool. It appears that people
are finally catching on. And rapid tests, like monoclonals, are now in short supply. Rapid tests
are finally being embraced. And we have over-the-counter tests. But now you're searching everywhere to
try to find them, because they're being sold out across the country. So I think this reinforces a
message that Vincent, I'm going to thank you for getting Michael Menon to sort of spread this early
on, is rapid tests are a really excellent public health tool. And in that two days before symptom
onset, in that three to five days afterwards, these are incredibly sensitive and rapid ways
of detecting people who are contagious, detecting people who are acutely ill. If you need to repeat
that test the next day, we're talking about tests that cost five to $10 here in the US per test,
where results are back in 15 minutes versus results that take some areas of the country
talking to a colleague in Oregon, where it's about four days in some places to get that result back.
Exciting in this area, we heard that part of the $2 billion testing plan from the White House
involves buying 647 million over-the-counter rapid tests to help subsidize these, to help get them
out so we can actually get those results. All right, active vaccination, never miss an opportunity
to vaccinate. And I was listening to a little bit of the United Nations. And vaccination is how
this pandemic ends is actually a theme. So I think they've been listening to Twiv. So let's talk a
little bit about vaccines, the Jabs that keep you from getting sick. And a couple of things,
and the first will be boosters. Friday, September 17th, the FDA advisory panel met,
and it was very interesting. I think what was interesting was sort of like the live stream
media coverage. You know, here was a discussion, you know, started off with a first vote,
moved on to another vote. And the whole time, sort of, I think people were on the edge of their
seat waiting for the different updates. And it got messy at times. There were words used that I
don't use in my house and that we don't allow our children to use. But I thought it was a really
healthy discussion. And a big thing that came out of this was this reassuring. This guy is not
falling. There was some certain information that led to some of their recommendations. And then on
Wednesday, the 22nd of this September 2021, we heard that following this advisory board discussion
and vote that the FDA authorized booster dose of Pfizer biotech COVID-19 vaccine for certain
populations. And so the US FDA amended the emergency use authorization, the EUA, for the Pfizer
biotech COVID-19 vaccine to allow for a single booster dose to be administered at least six months
after the completion of the primary series in these three categories.
Individuals 65 years of age are older. Individuals 18 through 64 years of age at high risk of severe
COVID-19 and individuals 18 through 64 years of age, whose frequent institutional or occupational
exposure to SARS-CoV-2 puts them at high risk of serious complications of COVID-19, including
severe COVID-19. And this authorization for clarity only applies to Pfizer biotech COVID-19 vaccine.
So I'm going to pull you in on this, Vincent. But what basically came out of this was really a
public health decision. It was a risk benefit. It was very clear on Friday from the discussion
that all the data that these individuals want is not yet available. It's not yet been available
long enough for them to really go through it. So this was one of those public health decisions,
where it seemed reasonable and appropriate to extend the EUA. But the initial idea that
everyone, 18, 19, 20-year-olds should be getting third doses did not make sense, was not recommended
by that advisory committee. In the coming weeks, we're going to learn more. We're going to learn
a lot about when and who might get that second shot. We're also going to learn, is this just
a Pfizer specific? Is Pfizer now the three and you're done vaccine? Will Pfizer require in the
future yearly boosters? And then what is the situation with Moderna and J&J? And don't worry,
we have some exciting data on J&J to follow. So Vincent, I don't know if you had any thoughts?
So this is just for people who previously received Pfizer, correct?
People who previously got two shots of Pfizer and now a third shot.
So if you really think the science tells you to have a third shot, you have to make it everybody,
not just Pfizer. You have to make it Moderna too, even though they didn't apply for it. So
as I've said before, I don't see the data. If I were eligible, I wouldn't take it,
because I don't think you need it. And I think that as we discussed last time that paper,
that opinion paper in the Lancet really laid it well out, the science doesn't say you need it yet.
Yeah. And the science will come. And what we're also going to see, and this also,
I think is similar to echo what I talked about early on, is we are now seeing a number of
individuals. We already know a number of individuals went ahead and got that third shot. So we're
going to see in coming weeks here, a large number of millions of individuals who got Pfizer will
now get a third. The suggestion is that the reactogenicity is even lower with that third shot.
We'll see more safety signal. We'll get a little more of our data. And then, yeah,
recommendations coming soon. Here, I think is a really important thing. I want to discuss
vaccines and pregnant women. And I think it's really incumbent on physicians to be
very up to date on the data. And I know there's this, I'm going to say false dichotomy out there.
The idea that people who are unvaccinated are somehow bad people, anti-vaxxers.
And I'm going to talk about the fact that over 80% of pregnant individuals in the United States
are not vaccinated. I'm going to talk a little bit about these are actually intelligent
individuals who are trying to make the right choice for themselves, for their unborn baby,
and talk a little bit about what is the information we have. I think people may remember this initially
started off focused on physicians. But I think this is expanded beyond that. But here again,
I want to focus on physicians to have this information, but also all of our listeners
have the information about COVID vaccines in pregnancy, so that these decisions can be
the informed one, the right one for that pregnant woman, the right one for that unborn child. So
on clinical update 59, I discussed the New England Journal Medicine article,
preliminary findings of mRNA COVID-19 vaccine safety in pregnant persons, where the authors
reported on 35,691 v-safe participants, 16 to 54 years of age identified as pregnant and found
no safety signals, no fertility issues, no miscarriage issues, etc. So very, very safe. In
clinical update number 78, we continued this, this thread, and we discussed the article
characteristics and outcomes of women with COVID-19 giving birth at US academic centers during the
COVID-19 pandemic. This is the we're moving from safe to are these individuals at higher risk.
And this was the study that found that pregnant women, pregnant people with COVID-19, were more
likely to have a preterm birth, right? 16.4% versus 11.5%. So a 5% higher risk of a preterm birth,
significantly higher rates of ICU admission over five times as likely. The odds of
requiring mechanical ventilation, intubation, were increased more than 14-fold and a pregnant
woman admitted to the hospital was 15 times more likely to die. So a pregnant woman who gets
infected with COVID-19 is at very high risk. And you can imagine that this risk translates into
bad outcomes for the unborn child, particularly as you can imagine when that pregnant woman
might die. So we've established safety. We've talked about how this is a high risk population,
but the safety data continues. The CDC has a special v-safe COVID-19 vaccine
pregnancy registry website. They update this regularly. It was updated the last on the 14th
of this month. And as of 913, the day before they updated, 158,465 pregnant women were registered
in the v-safe after vaccination health checker. And they are reporting there is currently,
there's still no evidence that any of the vaccines, including COVID-19 vaccines, cause
fertility or any other problems in this population. On the risk side, unfortunately, though,
here we have seen over 100,000 pregnant people infected and over 100 of these women have actually
died of COVID-19. What about taking it a step further? Not only are pregnant women themselves at
risk, not only are these vaccines safe, but is this a chance to protect two people? What happens
when that baby is born? And the mother makes that decision to get vaccinated during pregnancy.
Because a lot of times, and I understand this discussion, I understand the logic,
I'm going to challenge it, the idea of why don't you just wait until you're done with your
pregnancy and then get vaccinated. I'm going to discuss here an article where it says,
please get vaccinated before you have that child to give that child an extra bit of protection.
So this week, the research letter, high antibody levels in cord blood from pregnant women vaccinated
against COVID-19 was published in the American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology. Here,
as I mentioned in the US, only about 16% of pregnant women have been vaccinated despite this
really compelling evidence. So here, what they did is they looked at umbilical cord blood.
This is a way to assess our babies of women vaccinated while pregnant, being born with
that protection, that high level of spike antibodies. And in this study of umbilical cord blood
collected from 36 deliveries, 36 neonates, 100% studied were positive for the anti-spike IgG
at high titers. Among the 36 samples, 31 were also tested for anti-nuclear capsid. These were
all negative. So these are vaccinated women. These are women that were not infected,
who because they were vaccinated during pregnancy, were able to pass on that protection to their
children where we would expect that protection to last at least four months. So if you're pregnant,
get vaccinated, protects you and your child. Now, what about which vaccine is best? I like that
now, you know, I've been talking about the t-shirts are going to be on the different teams. I'm on
team spike backs or Moderna here. And so you might get a little bias here as I discuss this
comparing comparative effectiveness of Moderna, Pfizer, BioNTech, and Janssen, Johnson and Johnson
vaccines in preventing COVID-19 hospitalizations among adults without immunocompromising conditions,
United States, March to August 2021. This came out as an early release in the MMWR,
actually spoke to Saratoy at the Wall Street Journal about this. And this study was looking at
vaccine effectiveness against COVID-19 hospitalization. And I feel like whenever you say vaccine
effectiveness, you have to add against what? This looked at adults aged greater than 18
or older without an immunocompromised condition, immunocompromising condition admitted to 21
hospitals within the influenza and other viruses in the acutely ill, the IV network.
This is a case control prospective analysis. The case patients were admitted to the hospital
with COVID-19, PCR confirmed or an antigen test. The control patients had a viral illness, but they
had a negative test. 3,689 patients were included. So we have 1,682 case patients, 2,007 control
patients. And what did they report? The overall vaccine efficiency, right? And we're talking about
vaccine efficacy for preventing hospitalization. So overall, 2,362 patients were unvaccinated,
476 or 12.9 percent were fully vaccinated with one of these vaccines. So remember the numbers
there. So 476 were fully vaccinated with the Moderna vaccine. 738 were fully vaccinated with the Pfizer
BioNTech vaccine. And 113 were fully vaccinated with the Janssen vaccine as a one dose.
The vaccine efficacy against COVID-19 hospitalizations was higher for the Moderna vaccine,
they're saying 93%. The Pfizer BioNTech, 88%. And then the vaccine efficacy for both vaccines
was higher than the Janssen. I think there's a couple takeaways from here. If you're on team
Moderna versus Pfizer, you can claim to have one. Another takeaway is to say that the vaccines
continued to have very high efficacy over this period of time. And what were those sort of periods
of time? So Moderna, say 93% for the full surveillance period with 93 in the first 120 days,
dropping, I'd say dropping to 92, so like dropping from 93 to 92, holding above 90 at
greater than 120 days. The full surveillance for Pfizer was 88 starting off at 91. And there is
say a drop to 77. But there's wide confidence intervals here, 67 to 84. And then you look at
Janssen, and we're going to get to Janssen, Janssen over this period of time in this one study,
they're reporting 71% over time. So it's interesting that now, you know, and maybe this helps people
get excited about vaccines and people like to have choices. I think you can take this in several
ways. But one way you may take it is what about J and J? Maybe J and J is not just one and done.
So this next section goes out to all the redheads in the audience. This is and by redheads, I mean
people that got J and J vaccine, because my redheaded son got the Pfizer shots. And I don't know,
that was an expression that my grandmother, I think I got from my Irish grandmother is the,
you know, whenever someone was left out, it was, oh, my poor redheaded stepson, right?
I've got to figure out the history of that expression. But we have a bit about J and J.
So this starts off with Johnson and Johnson single shot vaccine showed strong and long lasting
protection in the real world. This is comes out of a preprint effectiveness of the single dose
at 26 Cove to S COVID vaccine. And what was this data, which is posted as a preprint among 390,000
507 17 vaccinated and 1.5 24, 153 matched unvaccinated individuals. This is huge, right? About half
a million compared to one and a half million matched unvaccinated individuals. They're reporting
here in this preprint, vaccine efficacy was 79% for a recognized COVID-19 infection,
right? Vaccine efficacy against infection and 81% for a COVID-19 related hospitalization.
They reported that this was stable over calendar time. And they also looked at states with a high
delta incidence and saw that this was holding for them as well. So when you grab your numbers,
I think it's important to see there's points in a line. This looks good. These data were
consistent with the phase three ensemble trial, where they were shown that those strong protection
against severe critical disease. But what about boosters? Maybe J&J is not the one and done.
Maybe J&J is the two and done. So what about a booster shot for folks with J&J?
So here, the announcement, and at this point, this is press release level from J&J booster shot at
two months. They report provided 94% protection against COVID-19 in the U.S. And this is the phase
three ensemble to study, looking at getting another shot of the Johnson and Johnson COVID-19 vaccine
56 days after the first. And so they say, and actually I have to say someone asked me this at work,
they say 100% protection. The confidence interval is 33 to 100. So that's a wide confidence interval
against severe critical COVID-19, at least 14 days post-final vaccination. 75% protection
against symptomatic moderate to severe COVID-19. This is looking at a global data set,
but confidence intervals 55 to 87, 94% protection against symptomatic moderate to severe COVID-19
in the U.S. And again, wide confidence intervals 58 to 100. And then they throw a second little bit
of data when a booster was given at six months. So booster shot at six months provided 12-fold
increase in antibodies. Here, they're reporting that a booster of J&J, given six months after
the single shot, compared to that second, that two months afterwards, gives you this extra 12-fold
increase in antibodies. These rises were irrespective of age. So we're getting a little more information.
I know people feel like, Oh my gosh, I got the J&J. How come nobody's talking about me? How come?
And it's over 10 million people got J&J here in the U.S. alone. So we're getting more data,
and I would not be surprised if the J&J becomes the two shots and you're done instead of the one
and you're done. Vincent, any thoughts on all that data? So last week, we did a paper which
showed lower efficacy for J&J and Rich Condits said, I bet a boost is what J&J needs. There you go.
Yeah. All right. Well, he may be right. Yeah, it is interesting. And J&J is a tough vaccine
when you look at antibody levels, because if you compare the antibody levels elicited by the
mRNA vaccines and the J&J vaccines, it's actually two different worlds. I think you're ending up with
geometric means in the thousands for Moderna and Pfizer. You're ending up with geometric
mean of less than 100 for J&J. But somehow J&J works. So we're thinking there may be
a different cellular aspect to the protection given from J&J, which again comes back to the
issue as people talk about boosters. If someone, if there is, turns out there's waiting immunity
with the Pfizer vaccine, should that third dose be Pfizer? Should it be J&J? Should it be Moderna?
I don't see that data quickly coming because Pfizer is going to study Pfizer. Moderna is going to
study Moderna. J&J is going to study J&J. There will only be small bits of information about
heterologous or mix and match out there. All right. Passive vaccination. The theme today is,
everyone seems to have found out monoclonal are really in demand. Here we're talking about passive
vaccination. So pre-exposure. So this or I guess pre-positive viral test. So post-exposure prophylaxis.
And the EUA, the emergency use authorization, was expanded for Eli Lilly's cocktail, the BAM
line of the map, a test of the map. And now that has an EUA expansion to include post-exposure prophylaxis.
People probably need to know a little bit about what I'm talking about here. So these neutralizing
antibodies can be used as a cocktail to treat high-risk individuals 12 years of age and older
who have either not been fully vaccinated or are not expected to mount an adequate immune
response to complete vaccination and have been exposed to someone infected with SARS-CoV-2
or who are at high risk of exposure in an institutional setting such as the nursing home or
prison. And we talked about how Regeneron Cove also has this indication. So this is that taking
that history. Okay, you're here. You're testing positive. Maybe you're here to get your monoclonals.
But you have that 78-year-old husband at home with COPD and diabetes and maybe a little more
weight than they should have. They can come in. If the test is positive, you treat them.
If the test is negative and they're having this exposure, you also treat them. And really excellent
data supporting this. But people may be asking, I thought we weren't doing Eli Lilly cocktails
anymore. I thought that they stopped using these with that beta variant, with that E484K, Dr. Griffith.
I don't know how many people are thinking that. But anyway, the nice thing about the delta variant
is that when they have looked at this and they actually have data now in the EUA,
authentic SARS-CoV-2 neutralizing data for bamelinibimab and a test of mab together,
there is no change in the fold reduction in susceptibility with beta. It was greater than
325. So this cocktail does not work against beta. It does work against delta. But do we
have now enough data to go ahead and start using this widely as post-exposure prophylaxis?
This is the Ugg moment, as people now know. Now that everyone is excited about monoclonals,
now that we have over 100,000 new cases a day, we've actually started rationing monoclonals
around the country. And there's actually a website, the phe.gov, where you can look and you can
actually see how many doses is my state going to get for a particular week. We're only getting
about 5,000 doses for all of New York State each week. So really not enough to meet the demand
for everyone who can potentially benefit from this. All right, the period of detectable viral
replication, that viral symptom phase, as I've been saying for a while, the time for monitoring
and monoclonals, not the time for antibiotics, not the time for steroids. We can do harm with
steroids. We can do harm and are not being helpful. We give people antibiotics here.
But we did get what I thought was an interesting press release from Gilett.
And this was Veklori. Anyone know what that is? Remdesivir. I'm going to replace Remdesivir
in this press release. Remdesivir significantly reduced risk of hospitalization in high-risk
patients with COVID-19. This data is going to be presented in detail at ID Week, which starts next
week. I'm going to be doing a presentation. This data is from a Phase 3 randomized double-blind
placebo control trial to evaluate the efficacy and safety of a three-day course of Remdesivir
for intravenous use for the treatment of COVID-19 in non-hospitalized patients
at high risk for disease progression. So this is, let's give Remdesivir, not during that second
week when they're being admitted for an early inflammatory process, let's give it in that first
week during the viral phase. And in an analysis of 562 participants randomly assigned any one-to-one
ratio to receive Remdesivir or placebo, Remdesivir demonstrated a statistically significant
87% reduction in risk for the composite primary endpoint of related hospitalization or all-caused
death. There were no deaths. So this is really, you know, I'm going to sort of say this is
going on to end up in the hospital. So the results show this 81% reduction for the
composite secondary endpoint of medical visits at all, or all-caused mortality, but again,
there's no mortality in this study. So 87% reduction, 81% reduction, great p-values,
p-0.008, p-0.002. Remdesivir early on during those first few days of illness is starting to look
like the monoclonal, starting to look like an efficacious intervention. The challenge, of course,
is this isn't just you come in and get that one monoclonal infusion. This is a three day. So
you got to come day one, day two, day three. So there's going to be a whole issue with operationalizing
this. Also, the issue is will the EUA expand? And we are hearing that on the horizon, there may be
oral drugs that may make this much easier to actually provide effective oral antivirals.
All right. What if you wait to let early inflammatory phase when people get hospitalized,
and then you decide to give them remdesivir? I think I've related over time. I've been less
than impressed. And there was another publication in the Lancet Infectious Diseases,
remdesivir plus standard of care versus standard of care alone for the treatment of patients
admitted to hospital with COVID-19. So this is the DISC COVERIG study, that's sort of a catchy
title there. This is a phase three randomized controlled open label trial. It's adaptive
multi-center. It was conducted in 48 sites in Europe. So France, Belgium, Austria, Portugal,
Luxembourg. And there were a number of different agents that were in this trial. So it's a one
to one to one to one to one to receive different agents. One of those was the remdesivir.
So let's just talk about the remdesivir versus control data. No significant difference in the
occurrence of serious adverse events between treatment groups. There were no noted benefit.
There were three deaths that were considered related to remdesivir by the investigators,
but only one by the sponsors safety team that was a paddle renal syndrome. So really not showing
any significant difference here. So we will probably be moving on hopefully to more exciting
agents in the coming weeks. But what about anticoagulation? This is when people end up in the
hospital. We start the steroids only in individuals in that second week who have oxygen saturations
less than 94. We often give remdesivir, but anticoagulation, what dose? So I thought this was a
good paper. I'm actually going to tell people to spend a little time looking at this, particularly
if you're treating patients, safety and efficacy of different prophylactic anticoagulation dosing
regimens in critically and non-critically ill patients with COVID-19, a systematic review and
men analysis of randomized control trials. This was published in the European Heart Journal,
cardiovascular pharmacology, and the authors searched for randomized control trials,
comparing treatment with an escalated dose, so an intermediate or therapeutic dose,
versus a standard prophylactic dose, looking at critically and non-critically ill COVID
patients that required hospitalization. And these are individuals who weren't on anticoagulation
for some other reasons, specifically COVID-related. The primary efficacy endpoint was all caused
death, and the primary safety endpoint was major bleeding. Seven randomized control trials were
identified. This included 5,154 patients followed for an average of 33 days, and we're comparing
standard dose prophylactic anticoagulation versus this escalated dose anticoagulation.
And this was not associated with a reduction in all-cause mortality, so when you escalate it
to a higher dose, we're talking 17.8 versus 18.6, so you're not getting an extra benefit, but there was
an associated increase in major bleeding up to 2.4 percent from 1.4, so a relative risk of 1.73,
and that was confidence intervals 1.15 to 2.60. So we do know that if you use higher dose anticoagulation,
you will have less clots, but you will also have more bleeds, and overall, you're not getting a
statistically significant mortality benefit to doing that. So current recommendations are still
prophylactic dosing across the board, but what's nice about this paper is you can actually look
through. You can look at the different studies. Again, we're at a point now when I don't think
people should be just grabbing one study, even if it's published in the England Journal, you need to
look at all the studies when you're trying to come up, and when I sit on the American side of
hematology guideline panel, we are looking through dozens, hundreds of studies at this point trying
to really come up with what does the science tell us. The science, unfortunately, is still low
quality, I will say, and if you look through this study, you're going to see that one of the outliers
is actually the REMCAP active for a TTACC paper. And what you have to do is that was a pretty large
number of individuals, 2,219, so as the potential to shift biases. But I will suggest people spend
a little bit of time reading this, try to get some context on what we know and the decisions
to be made about what level of anticoagulation. But I think it just reinforces, you know,
an individualized assessment of the patient's risk of thrombosis, and bleeding is important
when deciding on anticoagulation intensity. All right, and I'm going to sort of wrap it up here
with what I think is a little bit of good news. No one is safe until everyone is safe. This week,
the UN is in town here in New York, and we are hearing about a commitment to vaccinate the world.
It was announced Wednesday, September 21, 21, that the United States is doubling its purchase
of Pfizer COVID-19 shots to share with the world, increasing this up to 1 billion doses,
and there is a goal of vaccinating at least 70% of the global population within the next year.
So on that note, I'll remind everyone through the months of August, September, October,
donations made to parasites without borders will support floating doctors and all the great work
they do down in Panama. So go to parasites without borders.com, click donate and help us and help
us support them. Time for some email questions for Daniel. You can send yours to Daniel at microbe.tv.
Jody writes, my cousin, a health care worker in Michigan, who was pregnant in her third trimester,
wrote to ask for thoughts on whether to get a third shot of Pfizer. Her OB is all for it,
but she was curious to know whether or not I had encountered any discussion or studies on the matter.
I understand that pregnancy is an immunocompromised state and that pregnant women are at increased
risk of developing severe symptoms. But I also remember learning that fever during a pregnancy
can be harmful to the developing baby, and she could experience fever as a side effect after
receiving the shot. Can you shed any light on this issue for us? Yeah, no, this is this is a great
question. And and I think that, you know, one of the things about the meeting that was had on
Friday and the decision was made this week, is they're not saying don't give boosters. Pfizer
is a licensed vaccine. They're saying have this discussion with your provider. And so I'm going
to encourage this individual to do that. So I'm going to speak more broadly on this topic. First
off, kudos, you're in the 16% of pregnant women that have already gotten your two doses. I think
that's fantastic. And that really, you know, the data would really say that that's the wise decision
for her and her baby. But the third dose, you know, one of the big things that came out in the studies
that were discussed last Friday was that individuals under the age of 40 under the age of 50 really
continued to have really excellent protection. There's no compelling data that everyone across
the board needs that third dose. We certainly have no compelling data that that third dose
needs to be given across the board to pregnant women. So as a general, I will say the science
does not necessarily push one to go forward with that third dose during pregnancy. And this would
be one of those issues. We really are careful with vaccines. We really want to know the safety
profile before we encourage people to do that. And right now we have great safety data on the
two shots in pregnancy. We don't have the safety data on giving another dose. So have that conversation
with the physician get all the facts make an informed decision. Marcy writes question about masks.
Have you seen the singing masks? And what do you think of them for singing in a choir? All vaccinated,
standing six feet apart in a very large open room, a church outdoors for part of rehearsal.
Would face shields add anything? So I have not I am not familiar with the singing
the singing mask. That said, are you familiar with the singing mask? No, I'm not familiar with that.
But no, I mean, this is this is a creative it sounds very creative. I don't know what the data
is on it, but it'd be interesting to see because yeah, people want to do the activities that they
enjoy. Sometimes the singing is just singing because they love singing. I think there's some
singers on in the Twiv co-hosts. There's also some people that enjoy playing instruments. I'm a
flute player, by the way, because people didn't know that. So I'm trying to figure out how I can
play a flute if I have to convert over to something made out of silver or copper. I don't have enough
money to buy a silver flute. But so no, this sounds great and interesting. I'll have to look
into that. Yeah, they look like masks with an extended front, right, with some kind of structure
instead of sitting up against your face. So take a look. Yeah, it might make sense.
Mike writes, trying to convince my 23 year old daughter to get vaccinated. She's hesitant.
I think this is common in her age group. Not sure I can change your mind. I'm trying to point to
some credible large scale data showing the efficacy, which I define as reduction in hospitalization,
long COVID and death. The vaccines are all presented as having impressive 90% efficacy numbers.
I tried to read the paper you mentioned in number 800, risk factors and disease profile of post
vaccination infection in UK users of the COVID symptom study app. They reported 0.5% of the one
dose vaccinated subsequently caught COVID 0.2% of the two dose. But I did not see the number
of unvaccinated people in these data. Surely the number of cases in the UK unvaccinated population
is known over the same period. Yeah, so this is I think a really important conversation that
you're having. So keep having that conversation. The first thing to do is ask your daughter,
listen, find out what's going on. I've had several conversations and people always apologize.
I'm sorry, Dr. Griffin. I have a question. I know you're so busy. I'm never too busy to talk
about vaccines. What are the risks? What are people worried about in their early 20s? I was
talking to one of our case managers today who has a 25 24 year old daughter. It's a very close
2324. Sometimes actually telling stories that have been shared with you or that you've talked
to the person individually. And the story was here. Her 24 year old daughter got COVID and is still
continuing to have this chest pain that wakes her up from night. We have individuals who have
loss of smell. We have individuals when they lose their hair, we have individuals with long
COVID and all those issues. Most people in their 20s are in their heads immortal. So they're not
going to die. So the risk of death to them is not particularly persuasive. Ending up in the hospital
is not really part of their worldview. But a lot of the other things we've learned about COVID
is this young group, particularly, it looks like women more than men are at higher risk of a
post acute sequelae of COVID lingering long term issues. Teeth have fallen out, hairs fallen out,
fatigue, low energy, cognitive dysfunction, which we're now calling it instead of brain fog to
recognize just how profound that can be the inability to exercise at the level where they could be
for. So I think it's important to share and talk about these. How long will those things last to
be completely honest? We only have about two years of data. So you could throw that in there,
you may only feel crummy for one or two years, where we know the safety profile of the vaccines,
incredibly safe, much lower risk of having any problem by getting vaccinated compared to all
we've learned about this horrible virus. Robert writes, Dr. Griffin says he likes to emphasize
to people that COVID is not a two week disease. The situation is more complicated than just getting
COVID being sick for a couple of weeks and then getting better or not. If this is in fact the case,
why is it that long COVID seems to be understood by the medical community as a sequelae to COVID-19?
I think Dr. Griffin calls it a subset of packs rather than part of the acute disease process.
Is the distinction meaningful or just semantic? Also, we've only had slightly less than two years
experienced. This doesn't sound long to me, but then I'm 73. Yes, one day in my 70s, I will have
that wisdom and patience that it sounds like you have developed. Yeah, we only have a certain
period of time. So what are we talking about? And so when the NIH got together and they tried
to defy what was going on, they came up with this term P-A-S-C or past post-acute sequelae of
COVID. And what they were realizing and a colleague of mine, Sarah Dottie, published a paper with
Ken Cohen and some others at UnitedHealth Group looking at individuals that got COVID. What happened
to them over the next year? And we were seeing twice the incidence of new diagnosis of diabetes,
fivefold increase risk of stroke, things like that. So we started to realize that there were a
lot of sequelae, a lot of things that were happening to these individuals after COVID infection that
weren't just what we're being described in these support groups. So it's sort of larger umbrella
to understand what's going on. As a subset, we have individuals with this syndrome where they
have fatigue, where they have cognitive dysfunction, where they have a chest pain, where they have
headaches, nuanced headaches that they've never had before, a number of these other things that
we sort of put together. And what we basically, it is meaningful for us as clinicians, but I think
it's also meaningful for us living in this society, that there are individuals at four weeks who are
not better. There's individuals that eight weeks who are not better. We now have individuals who
got sick in March of 2020, who still are not well enough to return to their pre-illness
employment. And a lot of our large employers are telling us that's still about 10% of their
workforce. So I think this is really important. And I think it is meaningful. Will, at some point,
these people get better. Some of them are getting better. That's true. By the time you get about
one year out, a significant percent of these people have either improved or gotten better.
But unfortunately, there's a residual, a fairly large residual, that have continued to suffer
even 12 months, 18 months out. So Robert points out that I said on a recent podcast that there's
no long polio, but he says there is post polio, where years after recovering from polio and
regaining limb function, you start to lose it again. And so he points out that is what I think of as
a sequelae, right? It happens. But it's not really long polio because you don't have a continuous
set of symptoms as you do with with COVID. I mean, I know it's a distinction, but I think it's
actually clinically different, don't you think? Yeah. And I think that's an important distinction
that you make. And I was not that familiar in my training with post polio syndrome until I went
out to Colorado. And I was working in an area that had been really hard hit with polio. And so I
was taking care of a lot of individuals who were in their 50s, 60s, and older, who were on walkers
who basically said they had polio when they were younger, they thought they'd made a complete
recovery. But then when they got into their 50s, they had apparently lost enough reserve that they
needed a walker, which I'm in my 50s. And so if I was needing a walker in my 50s, I would be
quite shocked. So that is one of the things we worry about long term, what's going to happen?
We know with COVID now, months 18 months out, what's going to happen two, three, five years.
I do not expect it to be anything like the horrors of the post polio syndrome that we saw.
But boy, there are plenty of horrors that we're seeing now.
For any viral disease, you can often think of long term consequences. For example,
West Nile neurological infection, you have cognitive and motor problems. Even mumps can have long
term. In some boys, it would sterilize them. But it's not a continuous spectrum. Long COVID,
I think is different, because as you say, it just doesn't stop.
I would agree. That is COVID-19 clinical update number 81 with Dr. Daniel Griffin. Thank you, Daniel.
Oh, thank you, and everyone be safe.
