This week in virology, the podcast about viruses, the kind that make you sick.
From Microbe TV, this is Twiv. This week in virology, episode 814 recorded on October 7th, 2021.
I'm Vincent Rackeniello, and you're listening to the podcast All About Viruses. Joining me
today from New York, Daniel Griffin. Hello, everyone. How's everything, Daniel?
You know, it's actually all right, you know, right here in the immediate area. Actually,
if you look around the country, right, things are on the way down. Actually, if you look around
the world, there's these sort of interesting cycles where things shoot up, and then it goes down,
and we'll see where we go. But yeah, at the moment, particularly in the immediate area, but
I was in a call earlier today. Actually, Shane Crotty was on the call. It's funny,
because like when things come up, you know, people may think I know a lot, but I always, I'm like,
and can I call in a friend, Shane? Can I call on you? So yeah, but in parts of the country,
some of my colleagues on the call, it's not so great, right? There's a lot of parts of our
country where hospitals are still overflowing, where, you know, people just not even COVID, just
normal medical issues, they can't be seen, they're waiting, it's delaying care.
Yeah, so we know by no means are we through this storm. Yeah, we have an email about that sort of
situation in a certain part of the country today. Yeah, certain parts of the country, not so great.
Well, let me start with my quotation, and then I'm going to actually share what I think is an
entertaining story, which has a certain, well, that's a certain reason for sharing it. So the
quotation, there are in fact two things, science and opinion. The former begets knowledge, the latter
ignorance. And this is by Hippocrates. I just think this is very telling. I'm always a little
disappointed when some of my colleagues seem to be sort of searching for confirmation bias to
support their opinion, and not really just trying to move forward and learn. Hopefully, I'm trying
to keep my opinions to a minimum and share the science so that people can form their own opinions
based upon that science. Sort of an interesting story I think I'll share and these are dark times
in many parts of the country. But this was a story that actually, it was the first time I
laughed at work and well, it's been quite a while. But it was a friend, a colleague of mine who was
telling me a story, he's embraced monoclonals, he's even though he's a cardiologist. And he's
like, yeah, I sent this guy for monoclonals. And I was all excited that we got that done. But then
he left an office, he left a message at the office that he went for the monoclonals. He's doing great
now, but but he almost died. And it's like, well, my gosh, what happened? You know, it's surprising
because these monoclonals are so safe. What happened? Well, apparently, this gentleman went for the
monoclonals during one of these massive rainstorms that we had. And one of the things we do, right,
we send people like during that first week, they're feverish, they're sick, and they've got to get
into a car and either go to a tent, or in this case, go to an emergency room, get checked in,
be there for a number of hours, get the infusion, which he went ahead and did. But as he was leaving,
it was a torrential downpour. And so this feverish guy gets in his car and drives into an area of
such degree of flooding that it's actually up to the window level and his car completely stalls.
He has to actually smash out the window and then climb out the window and swim to where it's
shallow enough. And then the first person who offers to help him, he lets them know he has
COVID and they drive away. The police then come and they offer to drive him home until he informs
them that he has COVID. A little bit of a pause. They call his wife who then picks him up and
picks him home. So this was his harrowing monoclonal infusion experience. But then as he called my
colleague, Dr. Savie said, you know, the next evening, he felt like 100%. He felt great, despite
having COVID, despite having to swim through these freezing water. So good story. Yeah,
it's a very, very entertaining story. But yeah, this is one of those reasons why it would be nice
to be doing these in the home, bringing the therapies to these individuals, making it a little,
a little more accessible. All right. So some important updates, important dates for people
to put on their calendar. They're on my calendar. October 14 will be a discussion of the Moderna
booster. Interesting enough, as I found out from my in-laws, everyone's already getting
them Moderna booster. So I don't know what they're talking about. Apparently, you know,
boosters for all. So but this will be specifically Moderna is requesting a specific Moderna third
dose, which would be half the dose of the first two. So we'll hear what the FDA independent advisory
panel has to say on that. The next October 15th, Jay and Jay is going to be having the FDA
independent advisory committee discuss a booster for them. And I think we talked about the data
there, which is actually, I would say rather compelling getting that protection for severe
disease, hospitalization, up into the 90s, kind of at mRNA level, if you give that second dose. So
that will be interesting to hear, but we're sort of getting positive signals on a Jay and Jay
one and you're not done. I guess you need a second now. And also the heterologous
booster, the mix and match. What if you had one vaccine, can you get another? A lot of people
say, boy, I got the Pfizer. Can I just get the Moderna as my third dose? My mother actually,
she was talking to my dad last night. So yeah, your mother, she's already signed up for her third
dose. She she's going to get a Moderna. I'm like, what? And so I talked to my mother, she was like,
yeah, they call me back. I had two Pfizers and I want to get a Moderna and they told me I can't do
that. So we will find out what happens on the 15th. She still she's going to wait a little bit longer
to get a little more data before she and I make that decision. And then October 26 for a lot of
people Pfizer vaccine for kids, five to 11. And I'm going to talk a little bit about the fact that
this is going to be packaged differently, a different dose, actually even a different amount will be
injected. But we'll get to that as well. All right, so let us start off with children, COVID.
Children are at risk for COVID. I think that's now clear. And as I like to say, wearing a mask is
less traumatic for a child than being hospitalized. And we keep hearing about numbers in children,
but as numbers go down across the country, we had been up to this quarter million number for
children that's dropping below 200,000. So they're moving in the right direction there per week.
Hospitalization is getting a little bit of improvement. But again, this is regional where
we're seeing problems. But one of the things I wanted to talk about is I'll say success and
maybe when there wasn't success with getting children back out there for in-person activity.
So we have some data now on how did we do this summer in places where there was good guidance,
vaccination, masking, et cetera, mitigation measures versus where there wasn't. So we're
talking about a couple MMWR early releases. The first is multi component strategies to prevent
SARS-CoV-2 transmission, nine overnight youth summer camps, the United States, June through August 2021.
So as mentioned, this came out as an MMWR early release. And the authors reported on a total of
7,173 campers and staff that attended nine US overnight camps that implemented multiple
prevention strategies, including high vaccination coverage that was greater than 93% among eligible
persons, pre-arrival and frequent screening testing. That was a total of 38,059 tests
and additional prevention measures during this time period. There were only nine laboratory
confirmed COVID-19 cases and no secondary infections detected during this period. So
as I like to say, we can do this safely. On the other side of the coin, we can also mess this up.
COVID-19 outbreaks at youth summer camps, Louisiana, June through July 2021, came out also as an MMWR early release.
And here the authors were describing 28 camp outbreaks. There was a 31-fold increase in confirmed
camp associated cases compared with the previous summer. And the authors comment that this period
coincided with underutilization of preventive measures, such as the vaccines, the masking,
the physical distancing. So you remove those mitigation measures and you can do this poorly.
All right. Well, with the expansion, the impending, we hope, expansion of COVID vaccines
down to the 5 and 11-year-old. There's been a lot of discussions about trying to normalize
the COVID vaccines, trying to get them into pediatrician offices, because a lot of parents
want to have that discussion with pediatricians, not go to one of these mass vaccination sites.
Actually, it's coming up a lot. A lot of individuals don't really feel that comfortable going to one
of these large sites with the security presence. Maybe I have a little bit of this bias. You know,
if we're lost, my wife will go ask a police officer. I will. If I see a police officer,
maybe go the other direction, maybe this is by upbringing. You know, I always joke with the
police officers when I see them. My last name is Griffin, and we try to calculate how many
griffins were in the front seat as police officers and how many of us were in the vaccine cause and
trouble. But this vaccine, we are hoping a lot of parents are hoping they will be able to access
in the pediatrician's office. So just a little bit about what are we expecting on the horizon. So
the current Pfizer vaccine that we've been giving out has a purple cap. But we are hearing that the
new caps for the children will be orange caps. These are going to be different vials. They're
going to be 10 dose vials instead of the five slash six that we were doing before. It's going to be
a different amount to dilution. This is going to be a 1.3 ml dilution. The injection rather than
0.3 is going to be a 0.2 injection. These can sit in the ultra cold freezer for six months,
but you can put them in the refrigerator undiluted for 10 weeks, right? That's two and a half months.
So that's going to be a great way of getting these in pediatrician's offices, getting those
sitting there in the refrigerator. We all, as I think sort of embarrassingly say, we have a lot
of vaccines. We expect to have a lot of these. So we're not going to be, we're not expecting
people to be quite as stringent with the like, don't waste a dose. It's going to be more of a
don't miss an opportunity to vaccinate. There's also for the over 12, there's going to be a,
we hear a new gray top to vial that is already pre-diluted. And this can then sit pre-diluted
in a refrigerator for 10 weeks undiluted, or actually, let me see if I've got this right,
already deluded to the consent for 10 weeks. All right. So pre-exposure transmission testing,
another nice paper looking at the impact of vaccination on transmission. And this is really,
I think as we've discussed, the community motivation behind vaccination and the pandemic,
rather than just looking at individual risks. So we saw the pre-print, the impact of SARS-CoV-2
vaccination on alpha and delta variant transmission. And this study was performed as part of the
public health surveillance and NHS test and trace program quality assurance. And the authors
start by providing a little bit of background that the pre-delta, there was evidence that there was
some impact. And now they're going ahead and looking at the risk going forward. So they,
they performed a retrospective observational cohort study of contacts of SARS-CoV-2
infected index cases using contact testing data from England. And in this study,
37.2% of the contacts tested were PCR positive. They looked at two doses of the
BioNTech Pfizer or the Chadox as AstraZeneca in the alpha variant index cases. And the reductions
they were seeing, the adjusted odds ratio 0.18 versus 0.37. So about 82% reduction, about a 63%
reduction. But then when they looked at the delta variant, the odds ratio is 0.35 and 0.64. So about
a 65% reduction, about a 36% reduction. So not working quite as well. There was an interesting
comment. And I think that this is important and maybe plays into as people think about boosters.
Transmission reductions declined over time since the second vaccination for delta reaching similar
levels to unvaccinated by 12 weeks for Chadox and attenuating substantially for BioNTech
162 B2, the Pfizer BioNTech. So protection from vaccination in contacts declined in the three
months after second vaccination. So sort of this challenge, our vaccines are really great
at preventing hospitalizations and severe disease. But how long are we going to get this
impact on infection? How long are we going to get this impact on transmission reductions?
I've also made several questions about a couple AstraZeneca products.
The first one is the the the mabs that they have. And these are these long acting antibody
therapies. So AstraZeneca's AZD7442, very catchy, requests for emergency authorization for COVID-19
prophylaxis was filed in the US. So these are long acting monoclonals for prevention. And so
this request was was based mainly on data from the ProVent trial, PROVEND trial, where 5197
participants in a two to one randomization received this AZD7442, which has two mabs in there. And I'm
not going to go into which they are because this has become a pronunciation challenge.
And they compared this to placebo. And the primary analysis was based on 5172 participants
who did not have SARS COVID-2 infection in baseline in this trial, 77% reduction in
developing symptomatic COVID compared to placebo. So what's special here, right? And we've already
talked about how Regen Cove can be used in the EUA and we will go through the details on that
as a prophylactic. But here, this can be given IV or IM, right, as opposed to sub-Q. It's a little
nicer to give this IM. This was actually gluteal. So this was given in the tail. There's also a
longer half-life here. So these antibodies were optimized to have an extended half-life,
reduced FC receptor and complement C1Q binding. And so they are actually suggesting that this
can afford up to 12 months of protection following a single administration. So a lot of questions
I'm getting from my colleagues who take care of individuals who are immune suppressed.
We'll say cancer patients, patients with autoimmune disease, patients on immunosuppressive
medications, patients that we do not think are going to get the protection that we would like
from vaccinations or maybe even have a contraindication to vaccination. This is potentially a way of
providing passive protection. A little exciting news on the testing front, right? We've sort of
gone full circle and there's been a lot of folks embracing and really seeing the power of the
rapid tests, but also the at-home rapid tests. So on the 4th of October, the US FDA issued another
EUA for the ACON Laboratory's Flowflex COVID-19 home test. Per the manufacturer, they are planning
and they claim they have the capacity to produce more than 100 million tests per month. They think
they'll be able to ramp this up to 200 million per month by February 2022. So very exciting because
right now, as we know, everyone's excited about home tests, but no one can get them. I even tried
to do this myself. They are in short supply. And also, if you want to understand how to use these,
because right, you're going to be swabbing yourself the same day the CDC updated their COVID
self testing page where you can see some really nice infographics about how to stick that Q-tip
up your nose and get these samples. I presume this is an antigen test, Daniel? Yes.
Yeah. Is it going to be less than a dollar? Let's see if I have the money. Let's see if I have the
cost here. I do not know what the cost is going to be, but will it be less than a dollar? The answer is
no. Will it be maybe $5? Maybe, maybe. There is the potential that the US government will purchase
a lot of these and then distribute them. So that could be, well, not quite free because we're paying
our taxes. All right, active vaccination, you know, vaccines, the Jabs that keep you from getting
sick. And I like to say vaccination is how this pandemic ends. I'm talking about those first doses.
That's where we get our bag for our buck. In the New England Journal, we saw the peer read
publication Phase 3, safety and efficacy of the Chad Ox 1 COVID-19 vaccine. And these are the
finally, we're getting the peer reviewed publication of the ongoing results from the ongoing double
blind randomized placebo controlled Phase 3 clinical trial, looking at the safety, vaccine
efficacy, and immunogenicity of two doses of the AstraZeneca Chad Ox as compared with placebo
in preventing is always important. What are we looking at the onset of symptomatic and severe
COVID disease 2019 15 days or more after the second dose in adults, including older adults in the
United States, Chile and Peru. In this trial, a total of 32,451 participants underwent randomization
in a two to one ratio to receive this vaccine or placebo. So we had 21,635 versus placebo 10,816.
And the overall vaccine efficacy for preventing symptomatic and severe was 74%. Interesting enough,
the estimated vaccine efficacy for this endpoint was 83.5% in participants 65 years of age or older.
They report that this high vaccine efficacy was consistent across a range of demographic
subgroups. In the fully vaccinated analysis subgroup, they reported no severe or critical
symptomatic COVID-19 cases. So that's, you know, you got to think about our endpoints. So that's
a pretty excellent endpoint for looking at severe or critical disease 83.5 for symptomatic. So
a pretty, pretty impressive data here. On October 4th in the Lancet, we saw another article. Again,
on vaccines, effectiveness of mRNA, BNT, 162, B2, Pfizer, BioNTech, COVID-19 vaccine up to six months
and a large integrated health system in the US, a retrospective cohort study. So this is a peer
reviewed article. This is a retrospective cohort study where they analyzed electronic health
records of individuals who are members of Kaiser Permanente, South California. They were looking
at the effectiveness against infections and COVID-19 related hospital admissions for up to six months.
So this is a, this is a very robust data set, right, by an organization that I'll say does an
excellent job. 4,920,549 individuals were assessed for eligibility and ultimately 3,436,
9,957 were included. So for fully vaccinated infections, they report fully vaccinated
individuals, they report that effectiveness against infections declined from 88% during the first
month to 47%. So that's effectiveness against infection. So among sequenced infections,
vaccine efficacy, effectiveness against infections of the Delta variant was high during the forced
month, 93%. And that went to 53% after four months, effectiveness against other variants,
the first month, 97%, 67%, at four to five months. But what about vaccine effectiveness
against hospital admissions for infections with the Delta variant, 93% up to six months.
So I take away this as very encouraging. I know Pfizer vaccine has been getting a lot of bad press,
you know, people are a little upset that they get the Pfizer and set of Moderna, but vaccine
effectiveness against severe disease, right, hospital admissions with the Delta variant,
93% for up to six months. So I found this rather encouraging.
What about reinfection? I get a lot of questions about this.
And so there's a lot of articles out there, but this article, the durability of immunity
against reinfection by SARS-CoV-2, a comparative evolutionary study was published in the Lancet
Microbe. So we certainly see reinfections, mainly starting about three months after infection and
increasing over time. We know that if these folks get vaccinated, they can decrease their risk of
infection by at least twofold. We're not sure one dose got us there, but two doses did in the MMWR
publication we talked about. So if prior infection, we know that these individuals can get a benefit
from vaccination. In this study, the authors looked at antibody data for six human infecting
coronaviruses, extending from 128 days to 28 years after infection. This is a pretty broad
study, infection between 1984 and 2020. They use this data to estimate profiles of the typical
antibody decline and probabilities of reinfection over time under endemic conditions. They estimated
that reinfection by SARS-CoV-2 under endemic conditions would likely occur between three months
out to 5.1 years after the peak in the antibody response, suggesting a median of about 16 months.
They calculated that this protection is less than half the duration revealed for the other
endemic circulating coronaviruses. So OC43, NL63, 229E, if people have those remembered.
But what I'm going to say for a deeper dive into the comparison between protection from infection
versus vaccination, I'm going to recommend people go to 12, 813 discussion with Florian Kramer.
It's really a popular topic that people are trying to sort out. But just to make it clear,
we recommend that people who have been previously infected get the benefit of vaccination.
A popular question now, I don't know if Vincent, if you are aware of this, but I keep getting,
am I still considered fully vaccinated if I haven't had my booster?
And straight from the CDC, yes, everyone is considered fully vaccinated two weeks after their
second COVID vaccine in a two-shot series, or two weeks after a single dose vaccine for the
J&J Janssen for those folks here in the US. So I've been getting a lot of employers,
interesting enough, who are now demanding that their employees get a third dose,
otherwise they're not considered fully vaccinated. But straight from the CDC,
this is evolving, but at the moment, you're still good. I know we're up to 400,000 people
getting a booster per day here in the US. So yeah, anyway, all right, passive vaccination.
I want to remind people, remember monoclonals after high risk exposures and high risk people.
We talked a little bit about AstraZeneca is applying for this, but we already have post-exposure
prophylaxis as part of the EUA for Regen Cove. And who are the people that they are recommending
eligible for post-exposure prophylaxis? These are individuals who are at high risk for progression
to severe COVID-19, including hospitalization or death. These are folks who are either not
fully vaccinated or are not expected to mount an adequate immune response to the SARS-CoV-2
vaccination, right? So individuals with immunocompromising conditions, those on immunosuppressive
medicines. So you're looking at individuals who have been exposed. But I also want to point out
they also talk about for individuals in whom repeat dosing is considered because they continue
to have ongoing exposure. So just a little bit of subtlety there. An individual who is immunosuppressed,
who is not getting that protection from vaccine, but continues to be exposed over and over.
The first dose is the 600, 600. But you can actually continue to dose them every four weeks
with a 300 milligram, 300 milligram. And that can either be by subcutaneous injection. So in this
sense, then we have to get two instead of four shots, or they can get an intravenous infusion
every four weeks. For while we were stepping back a little on prophylaxis because of shortages,
but as the numbers are going down, as we're getting improved access, we're stretching back
out with the post-exposure prophylaxis. All right, the period of detectable viral replication,
not the time for antibiotics, and not the time for steroids. We can do harm there.
This is for a lot of people exciting. The beginning of a new era, Merck and Ridgeback
announced the planned interim analysis results from the phase three move out trial, looking at
the use of the oral antiviral. This is a pill, malnupiravir, in the early treatment of at-risk,
non-hospitalized adult patients with mild to moderate COVID-19. So this was a planned interim
analysis. They evaluated data from 775 patients who were initially enrolled in the trial, the phase
three move out trial. And at the time of the decision to stop recruiting, the trial was approaching
full recruitment, sample size of 1,550 patients with more than 90% of the intended sample size already
enrolled. When they perform this interim analysis, and I want to point out, this is top line data.
This is not peer reviewed. We don't have the details that will be coming forward. They reported
in this study that malnupiravir reduced the risk of hospitalization or death by approximately
50%. So we had 7.3% versus 14.1%. The little bit of sort of details here,
in the individuals that received the antiviral, there were zero deaths. In the placebo group,
there were eight deaths. So we're looking at zero versus 2%. So 2%, the expected mortality,
zero percent in the folks that got this therapy. What about eligibility and timing? These
individuals had to have laboratory confirmed COVID-19 with symptom onset within five days
of study randomization, right? So a little bit longer than we would ideally want, right? Because
you get randomized at day five may take you another day before you actually get the therapy.
All the patients had to have at least one risk factor associated with poor disease outcome,
right? So this is a slightly higher risk group. People did well, very well tolerated
therapy. There is a recommendation to go ahead and look at possibly getting EUA. So we will find
as we go forward. But just a little background, right? Because this is going to be one of the
first drugs here that is being introduced. This is a RNA, dependent RNA polymerase inhibitor,
right? That's something that we mammals don't have to worry about. There is going to be discussion
about the safety of this drug. That's why it's going to go through the FDA. But this is really
the first in this class going forward. We expect there to be another very similar drug. And we also
expect another drug that we've talked about that's going to target the protease on the horizon. So
fingers crossed, we're looking about three oral drugs being available by December. But I was
going to, I was going to Vincent, do you want to make any comments at this point? I sort of thought
this was an exciting bit of news. I think it's great that we these are in development. My only
concern, and I'm sure as a physician who treats AIDS patients, Daniel, these will be initially
used as monotherapy. And I'm just concerned that we're going to get rapid resistance,
which will render them less useful. What do you think? Yeah. So I hopefully we've learned from
the HIV. And we've also learned from influenza, right? Is that if you use these drugs all by
themselves, you run a risk, particularly if they're used widely, which we're thinking they will be
of inducing resistance. So I've already talked about the concept of maybe using this with maybe
the protease inhibitor, maybe if we can use two drugs, we can put up a barrier to that resistance.
So no, I think I think that's key. Anytime we use a drug, we we can end up with resistance. So it may
be that we want to look at using two drugs that we're not pressuring and driving that.
I worry particularly if people use this more than just as a five day therapy. What if you have
a person who's immunosuppressed and you start using it for a longer period of time?
But don't you have to trial them in combinations to get them approved that way?
Yeah, we're going to have to do that.
And this will be two different drug companies, three drug companies all like
playing nicely working together. But it is interesting with HIV, we're often using
three drug therapy. That's kind of the triple highly effective antiretroviral therapy,
where often historically, it was three different companies were producing each
of the different drugs in the cocktail. All right, timing. So we've got exciting
stuff because the IDSA meeting was just recently. And so this was data that was presented there,
and it was risk factor analysis for hospital admission following severe acute respiratory
syndrome, coronavirus 2, SARS-CoV-2, monoclonal antibody treatment. And this was really looking
at timing. If we get those monoclonals in earlier, does that give us better bang for our buck?
So we look at this whole like less, you know, seven to 10 days after symptom onset, 70 to 80%
reduction. But are we going to get even more reduction if we get them in the first few days?
So here they're looking at patients that received what they say is early. So within
days one through five of symptom onset and comparing those to people who received them late,
six to 12. And so here we were seeing getting the MAB infusion in the first five days resulted
in a 54% reduction in progression relative to those folks that get them late. So with the monoclonal
timing matters, I know a lot of centers closed down over the weekend. A bit of a tragedy right
person that's diagnosed on a Friday evening and they can't get treated until Monday or Tuesday,
right? So we really need to focus on timing here of the patients that received the monoclonals
in days one through three, none zero experienced disease progression. So sooner is better.
We're hoping this translates in the oral antiretrovirals as well. See my antiretroviral slit,
my world of HIV is coming back. But yeah, we're really hoping sooner can make more of a difference
than later. All right, everybody, MISC, MISC, and MISC-A, remember those multi-system inflammatory
syndrome? So we have actually finally got a little bit of guidance on treatment coming out
in a publication of peer reviewed article, IVIG compared to IVIG plus inflexumab in multi-system
inflammatory syndrome in children. This was published in pediatrics, the official journal
of the American Academy of Pediatrics. This was a retrospective cohort study of 72 patients with
MISC-C and they're looking at IVIG alone versus IVIG plus inflexumab, right? So this is going to
neutralize the TNF alpha. Basically what I'm going to just nutshell this here, they were looking at
better outcomes in the children that got remikade, the inflexumab added to their IVIG. They reported
that patients with MISC-C compared to those with IVIG alone were less likely to require any
additional therapy, decreased ICU length of stay, decreased development of left ventricular
cardiac dysfunction, more rapid decline in their C-reactive protein, so following inflammatory markers.
All right, a couple exciting things here on long COVID. I feel like I'm going a little long today.
COVID is not just a two-week viral illness for many people. First, as of October 1st, we now have
an official code for post acute sequelae of COVID-19. This is U09.9 post COVID-19 condition
unspecified. Going forward, we'll have subsets. Also some exciting data on the impact of vaccination
on long COVID, the article efficacy of COVID-19 vaccination on the symptoms of patients with
long COVID, a target trial emulation using data from the COM pair, that's capital P capital R,
E cohort in France. This was posted on Lancet as a pre-print. So the authors used data from this
long COVID cohort. This was a cohort in France. Vaccinated patients were matched to unvaccinated
controls in a one-to-one ratio by using their propensity scores. And they looked at outcomes
120 days after baseline. They looked at the disease severity. So you have 455 patients in
the vaccine group, 455 in the control group, and what did they find? They reported that by 120
days, vaccination was associated with a reduction in long COVID symptoms. They saw double the rate
of patients in complete remission. They saw a reduced disease impact on patients' lives
and the proportion of patients with an unacceptable symptom score. So this is encouraging. Remember,
this is, and we probably will never get a randomized placebo control trial. There's always the concern
that there was some sort of a placebo effect. Also, people got vaccinated and unvaccinated.
They're not exactly matched. But this is something that is consistent with our clinical experience,
where we're treating hundreds, thousands of folks. And we're seeing this report
encouraging. But what about Beckadysm, right? That's what we scientists care about. We do want
our patients to get better, but we also like to know what is going on. And just, we're going to
close with a couple articles on some insights into mechanisms. The peer-reviewed article,
persistent clotting protein pathology in long COVID, post-acute sequelae of COVID-19, PASK
is accompanied by increased levels of anti-plasmid. Now, this was published in the Journal
Cardiovascular Diapatology. This is not a journal I usually read, and I'm not as familiar with some
of the platelet activation studies that they did. But basically, going through the suggestion here
was that hypercoagulability, a persistent hypercoagulability was being driven by inflammatory molecules,
circulating microclots, hyperactivated platelets, issues with the fibrolinic system.
And then the speculation here, which requires further study, is that with clotting pathologies
involved, maybe some anti-clotting therapies can have an impact on long COVID. So hopefully,
this will give us some sense of what to do going forward. COVID toes, right? Remember COVID toes?
I have special socks with COVID toes. The article Type 1 Interferon Response and
Vascular Alteration in Chilblain-like lesions during the COVID-19 outbreak was published in the
British Journal of Dermatology. This was an observational study conducted 9 through 16 April
2020 at Son-Louis Hospital in Paris, France. 50 patients referred with chilblain-like lesions
were seen during the period of the COVID-19 pandemic included in this study. They were comparing the
skin and blood endothelial and immune cell activation in the chilblain-like lesions
in these COVID folks to seasonal chilblains that were cold-induced sporadic chilblains.
They reported that they found chilblain-like lesions were characterized in the COVID folks,
higher IgA tissue deposition, more significant transcriptomic activation of complement and
angiogenesis factors. They reported systemic immune response associated with IgA anti-neutrophil,
cytoplasmic antibodies and 73% of patients and elevated Type 1 interferon blood signature
compared to healthy controls. They found blood biomarkers which they reported related to endothelial
dysfunction and activation, angiogenesis, endothelial progenitor cell mobilization,
really supporting in their analysis a role for endothelial dysfunction in the chilblain-like
lesions. So very, very interesting. This is something that actually I think a lot of the nurses
noticed early on. They're spending a little more time than the physicians looking at the
patients, something that was seen in the outpatient setting as well. So just interesting that we're
starting to get a little science to maybe help us understand. I like to close by saying no one
is safe until everyone is safe. We are going to continue during the months of August, September
and October to donations made to parasites without borders, doubled and going to support
floating doctors with their efforts down in Central America. So drop what you're doing,
go to parasiteswithoutborders.com, click on donate and help us continue to do our work
and help us to support this organization. Time for some email questions for Daniel.
You can send yours to Daniel at microbe.tv. Lisa is a nurse practitioner, a pediatric nurse
practitioner who writes, I agree, kids are at risk. The decision made by adults responsible for
protecting them. Sadly, too often put them at higher risk than they need to be. While numbers
here in Florida are finally beginning to trend down, they remain much too high. We are in the middle
of a mask debate with a local chiropractor handing out blank, signed medical mask exemptions after
a very contentious school board meeting in which our county school board instituted a mask mandate
in defiance of our governor's ban on this. Parents continue to show up in front of our
schools with signs that making our kid wear masks is child abuse. Parents and children too often
refuse to abide by our request that they wear masks in our office. And now our new state
surgeon general who says he is rejecting fear over COVID mania has decided that as long as they
are feeling well, our school children, many of whom of course are unable to be vaccinated or
if they are able or not, no longer need the quarantine or test simply because they've been
exposed to this pesky little virus. I am curious as to your opinion on this brilliant public health
policy. Yeah, I'm horrified actually just to be frank. I mean, you know, when you see like the
movies, right, there's always like the physician who can outrank the general, you can't do that
because of this health issue and somehow in the real world. There's no under that outranking going
on. Yes, 18 months ago, there was this myth that started to be spread that children were not
at risk of COVID. Well, children don't get COVID. Well, they're not at risk of COVID. But now that
we saw children getting exposed to COVID, we saw hundreds of thousands of children getting infected
per week. We saw thousands of children ending up in the hospital. We see children, multiple
children dying every week. There really has to be a certain point when you start off with no
children are at risk of COVID, children can die of COVID, children can get hospitalized with COVID,
children can develop long COVID with long term disabilities. Yes, this is a horrible thing to
let happen to our children. And we don't really know what are going to be the long term effects
of having been infected with this horrible virus. The second is we do know things that work,
things that reduce our risk. You shouldn't have to choose between education and safety for your
children. A child shouldn't have to choose between education and safety. We know how to keep our
children safe. Wearing a mask is something that parents complain a lot more about than children.
A lot of children actually kind of like the masks with the different designs and maybe it's become
an accessory. I just really think we have to step back and take this out of the political arena.
This is not a partisan issue. This is not a political thing. This should not be something that gets
you reelected. What should get you reelected and what should get you support is protecting our
children, helping them get educated safely. And we know how to do that. We keep talking about all
the data behind that. Michelle writes, I'm in a quandary trying to decide what the best option
for my daughter is. She turns 12 in January. She's 61 inches tall, 150 pounds. So she's the size
of a small adult. She tends to school in which masks are only optional. Most kids are not wearing
them. My concern is whether to get my daughter vaccinated in late fall with the children's dose
or wait until January for the adult dose. Yeah, I mean, I have to say we've talked about this about
this is perfect, right? Is that person right on the line? There's going to be no judgment. It's
going to be this is the day it happens. But you know, this is even true with influenza. I have a
colleague who's a hematology oncologist and he was turning city turned 65 today. So happy birthday
Bruce. And Bruce went to get his hired dose because they're still using the egg based vaccine at the
healthcare system. So he wanted to get the over 65 high dose because they're not using the cell
based flu vaccine. And they said, I'm sorry, you know, it's Friday, your birthday is not until
Thursday. You can't get it today. You'll have to come back when you turn 65. So it's interesting.
People are pretty rigid about this stuff. The children all across look to be getting a really
robust response with the lower dose. I would say don't don't wait. Don't miss an opportunity to
vaccinate. Don't miss an opportunity to give your child that protection. If it turns out in the
future, you know, boosters are recommended for, you know, individuals as we get more information
about correlates of immunity. But yeah, let's I would encourage you to go ahead and when your
child is eligible, go ahead and get the proper dose for that age. Daniel writes in New South Wales,
Australia at the moment, there are a number of people in ICU and dying after full vaccination.
I know this is to be expected. But I feel that discussion of this is avoided and leads my older
friends, particularly to feel confused and helpless. All the people who have died here post
vaccine have been in their 80s and 90s. They have also all had other underlying issues.
But the underlying issues are never reported. My understanding of why this would occur at all
is that the individual was unable to mount an immune response to the vaccine. Not that the
vaccine has weakness, but the individual. Is this correct? Are these are there young healthy people
who make no immune response and are protected for some reason? Is there a specific list of age
plus underlying conditions that people can look at and clearly understand their level of risk?
So yes, I actually feel like you're right on with this. We talked about the vaccines reducing
your risk of death by, I'm going to say 30, right? We'll pick that as a number. You hate to pick one
study, but that seems to be reasonable. So if you went from your risk, you're 90 years old,
you're obese, you have diabetes, you have Down syndrome, right? Let's stack them all together.
If your risk was 60% that you were going to die if you got COVID, well, that you take 60
divided by 30, you still have a 2%. You still have a one in 50 chance of dying.
My wife and I were talking yesterday, we're out walking the dogs. And I was saying, Jessica,
when you get this reduction, so you've got your vaccine, you're now at 95% reduction
for ending up in hospital, when you started off, you're in your 40s, your ideal body weight,
you exercise, you have no, you started off with maybe a 1%, and now you're down to
5% of 1%, incredibly low. So this is that risk reduction. People think, oh my gosh, 95% reduction.
That means 5% of people are going to end up in the hospital. No, you have to take your baseline risk,
and this is a reduction below that. So yes, we are going to see a couple people a day here in the
US, right? Large country who are vaccinated and still end up dying, but we're going to see thousands
who are unvaccinated end up in the hospital and dying. We're also going to see a certain
percent of people who are vaccinated end up in the hospital, but that's going to be a 30-fold,
or a 10-fold reduction in that number. So that's really, you're really hitting right on it.
This is a reduction in baseline risk. So yeah, who are going to be those people who still end
up in the hospital? It's going to be predominantly older individuals. It's going to be predominantly
individuals with a lot of comorbidities. And those people that do die, they're going to be those
individuals who have the highest risk factors. And finally, Helen is the parent of a 34-year-old
adult with down. She has had two Pfizer vaccines, wondering if there are any data on how well people
would down respond to the vaccines. The order is in a day program where everyone's vaccinated,
but she's still concerned. Yeah, no, that's an excellent question. And I think you hit on one of
the things that I touched on there. A down syndrome is a significant risk factor for hospitalization
and death. I think it's about a 10-fold. It was a British medical journal article in September,
where they were looking at these. Actually, it's a great article, British medical journal. I think
it was the 17th of September, the article came out, where they were looking at all these different
factors. Down syndrome was about a 10-fold increase risk of death. So when they talked about populations
that they felt were at increased risk, when they started talking about the Pfizer booster,
down syndrome was one of those thrown in there. So yeah, individuals with all these different
comorbidities, particularly down syndrome are at increased risk. What about response to the
vaccine? I haven't really seen any really good data looking specifically at individuals with
the down syndrome response, but put it in that context of the overall risk.
That's COVID-19 clinical update number 83 with Dr. Daniel Griffin. Thank you, Daniel.
Oh, thank you. And be safe. And I say that to all those kids have to go to school without masks.
Be as safe as you can.
